IN THE SUPREME COURT OF JUDICATURE.
COURT OF APPEAL.

Royal Courts of Justice.
Thursday, 29th July. 1971.

A Appeal by defendant from judgment of Master Elton given on
assessment of damages pursuant to Order 37 rule 1 on 8th March,
1971.

Before

THE MASTER OF THE ROLLS (Lord Denning),
LORD JUSTICE PHILLIMORE and
B
LORD JUSTICE MEGAW.

Between

ANGLIA TELEVISION LIMITED
Plaintiff
Respondent
and
C
ROBERT REED
Defendant
Appellant
--------------------
(Transcript of the Shorthand Notes of The Association of Official
Shorthandwriters, Ltd., Room 392, Royal Courts of Justice, and
2, New Square, Lincoln's Inn, London, W.C. 2.)
--------------------
D
Mr. ANDREW BATESON, Q.C., and Mr. DESMOND BROWNE (instructed by
Messrs. Crawley & de Reya) appeared on behalf of the Respondent
Plaintiff.
Mr. GERALD BUTLER (instructed by Messrs. Richards, Butler & Co.)
appeared on behalf of the Appellant Defendant.
E
- JUDGMENT -

F
1.

THE MASTER OF THE ROLLS: We need not trouble you, Mr. Bateson.
The Anglia Television Ltd. were minded in 1968 to make a
film of a play for television entitled "The Man in the Wood".
It portrayed an American married to an English woman. The
A American has an adventure in an English wood. The film was to
last for 90 minutes. Anglia Television made many arrangements
in advance. They arranged for a place where the play was to be
filmed. They employed a director, a designer and a stage
manager, and so forth. They involved themselves in much
B expense. All this was done before they got the leading man.
They required a strong actor capable of holding the play
together. He was to be on the scene the whole time. Anglia
Television eventually found the man. He was Mr. Robert Reed, an
American who has a very high reputation as an actor. He was
C very suitable for this part. By telephone conversation on the
30th August of 1968 it was agreed by Mr. Reed through his agent
that he would come to England and be available between September
9th and October 11th 1968 to rehearse and play in this film. He
D was to get a performance fee of £1,050, living expenses of £100
a week, his first class fares to and from the United States,
and so forth. It was all subject to the permit of the Ministry
of Labour for him to come here. That was duly given on the 2nd
September 1968. So the contract was concluded. But unfortun-
ately there was some muddle with the bookings. It appears that
E Mr. Reed's agents had already booked him in America for some
other play. So on the 3rd September 1968 the agent said that
Mr. Reed would not come to England to perform in this play.
He repudiated his contract. The Anglia Television tried hard
to find a substitute but could not do so. So on the 11th
F September they accepted his repudiation. They abandoned the

2.

proposed film. They gave notice to the people whom they had
engaged and so forth.
Anglia Television then sued Mr. Reed for damages. He did
not dispute his liability, but a question arose as to the damages.
Anglia Television do not claim their profit. They cannot say
what their profit would have been on this contract if Mr. Reed
had come here and performed it. So, instead of claim for loss
of profits, they claim for the wasted expenditure. They had
incurred the director's fees, the designer's fees, the stage
manager's and assistant manager's fees, and so on. It comes
in all to £2,750. Anglia Television say that all that money
was wasted because Mr. Reed did not perform his contract.
Mr. Reed's advisers take a point of law. They submit that
Anglia Television cannot recover for expenditure incurred before
the contract was concluded with Mr. Reed. They can only
recover the expenditure after the contract was concluded. They
say that the expenditure after the contract was only £854-65,
and that is all that Anglia Television can recover.
The Master rejected that contention: he held that Anglia
Television could recover the whole £2,750; and now Mr. Reed
appeals to this Court.
Mr. Butler, for Mr. Reed, has referred us to the recent
unreported case of Perestrello & Compania Limitada v. The United
Paint Co. Ltd. on the 15th April, 1969, in which Mr. Justice
Thesiger quoted the words of Chief Justice Tindal in 1835 in the
case of Hodges v. Earl of Litchfield (1 Bingham's New Cases 492)
at page 498:
"The expenses preliminary to the contract ought not
to be allowed. The party enters into them for his own
benefit at a time when it is uncertain whether there
will be any contract or not."
3.