Die Jovis, 12° Maii 1977
Upon Report from the Appellate Committee, to whom
was referred the Cause Anns and Others against London
Borough of Merton, That the Committee had heard
Counsel, as well on Thursday the 3d, as on Monday
the 7th, Tuesday the 8th, Wednesday the 9th, Thursday
the 10th, Monday the 14th, Tuesday the 15th, Wednesday
the 16th and Thursday the 17th, days of February last,
upon the Petition and Appeal of the London Borough
of Merton of The Town Hall, The Broadway, Wimble-
don, London, S.W.19, praying, That the matter of the
Order set forth in the Schedule thereto, namely, an
Order of Her Majesty's Court of Appeal of the 10th of
March 1976, might be reviewed before Her Majesty the
Queen, in Her Court of Parliament, and that the said
Order might be reversed, varied or altered, and that the
Petitioners might have the relief prayed for in the Appeal
or such other relief in the premises as to Her Majesty the
Queen in Her Court of Parliament, might seem meet;
as also upon the Case of Michael Ralph Anns, Kenneth
Rodney Blackwell, Alfred Colston, Brian Thomas
Davenport, Dermott O'Shea, Florence Mary O'Shea,
Anthony Charles Phillips and William Patrick Walker
lodged in answer to the said Appeal; and due considera-
tion had this day of what was offered on either side in
this Cause:
It is Ordered and Adjudged, by the Lords Spiritual
and Temporal in the Court of Parliament of Her Majesty
the Queen assembled, That the said Order of Her
Majesty's Court of Appeal, of the 10th day of March
1976, complained of in the said Appeal, be, and the
same is hereby, Affirmed, and that the said Petition and
Appeal be, and the same is hereby, dismissed this House:
And it is further Ordered, That the Appellants do pay,
or cause to be paid, to the said Respondents the Costs
incurred by them in respect of the said Appeal, the
amount thereof to be certified by the Clerk of the
Parliaments.
Anns and Others
(Respondents) v.
London
Borough of
Merton
(Appellants).

HOUSE OF LORDS
ANNS AND OTHERS
(RESPONDENTS)
v.
LONDON BOROUGH OF MERTON
(APPELLANTS)
Lord Wilberforce
MY LORDS,
Lord
Wilberforce
This appeal requires a decision on two important points of principle as to
the liability of local authorities for defects in dwellings constructed by builders
Lord Diplock in their area namely:
Lord Simon of
Glaisdale
Lord Salmon
Lord Russell
of Killowen.
1. Whether a local authority is under any duty of care towards owners
or occupiers of any such houses as regards inspection during the
building process.
2. What period of limitation applies to claims by such owners or occupiers
against the local authorities.
Before these questions are discussed it is necessary to explain at some tedious
length the procedural background which unfortunately complicates the
decision-making task.
Procedural issues
The present actions were begun on 21st February 1972. The plaintiffs
are lessees under long leases of seven flats or maisonettes in a two storey block
at 91, Devonshire Road, Wimbledon. The owners of the block and also the
builders were the first defendants, Walcroft Property Company Ltd.: after
its completion in 1962 they granted long leases of the maisonettes: the fifth
and sixth plaintiffs (O'Shea) are original lessees, having acquired their lease in
1962; the other plaintiffs acquired their leases by assignment at dates in 1967
and 1968.
The local authority at the time of construction was the Mitcham Borough
Council: on 9th February 1962 they passed building plans for the block,
which were deposited under the byelaws. Later this council was superseded
by the London Borough of Merton, the second defendants, which took over
their duties and liabilities.
In February 1970 structural movements began to occur resulting in cracks
in the walls, sloping of floors, etc. The plaintiffs' case is that these were due
to the block being built on inadequate foundations, there being a depth of
2' 6" only instead of 3' 0" or deeper as shown on the deposited plans. On
21st February 1972 writs were issued against both defendants—the separate
proceedings were later consolidated. As against the first defendants (the
builders) the claims were for damages for breach of contract and also for
breach of the implied undertaking under section 6 of the Housing Act 1957.
As against the council the claims were for damages for negligence by their
servants or agents in approving the foundations upon which the block was
erected even though (sic) they had not been taken down to a sufficient depth
and/or in failing to inspect the said foundations. This claim was expressed
as follows:
"5. Further or in the alternative the said damage has been caused by
the negligence of the Second Defendants in allowing the First Defendants
to construct the said dwelling house upon foundations which were only
"2' 6" deep instead of 3 feet or deeper as required by the said plans,
alternatively of failing to carry out the necessary inspections sufficiently
carefully or at all, as a result of which the said structural movement
"occurred."
310530
A

As particulars given under this paragraph the plaintiffs stated:
"Under the Building Byelaws the Second Defendants were under a
"duty to ensure that the building was constructed in accordance with
"the plans, and the building should have been inspected inter alia before
"the foundations were covered.
"The Plaintiff's case is that the Second Defendants should have carried
"out such inspections as would have revealed the defective condition of
"the said foundations, that if any inspection was made then it was carried
"out negligently, and that if no inspection was made that in itself was
"negligent."
Both the allegations in the statement of claim and those in the particulars
were to some extent misconceived as I shall show later.
The first defendants did not put in any defence but undertook to carry out
certain work. They did not appear in the hearings to be mentioned or on
this appeal.
The second defendants filed a defence on 8th February 1973 and on 9th
October 1974 the consolidated actions were transferred to an official referee.
On 16th October 1975 an order was made,
"that the issue between the Plaintiffs and the 2nd Defendants whether
"claim is statute barred be tried on 24th October 1975".
On 24th October 1975 this issue was tried by His Honour Judge Edgar Fay,
Q.C., who decided that the claims were statute barred. In a written judgment
His Honour held that time began to run from the date of the first conveyance
of each of the properties concerned: the latest of these dates was 5th November
1965, which was more than six years before the date of the writ. In so deciding
the judge (correctly) followed an observation (obiter) by Lord Denning,
M.R. in Dutton v. Bognor Regis U.D.C. [1972] 1 Q.B. 373, 376.
The plaintiffs appealed to the Court of Appeal from this decision on 17
February 1976. Before the appeal came on, namely on 10 February 1976 the
Court of Appeal (Lord Denning, M.R., Roskill and Geoffrey Lane, L.JJ.) in
Sparham-Souter v. Town and Country Developments (Essex) Ltd. [1976] 1 Q.B.
858 decided that the cause of action did not accrue before a person capable of
suing discovered, or ought to have discovered, the damage. Lord Denning,
M.R. in his judgment expressly disavowed his earlier dictum in Dutton's case.
On this view of the matter none of the present plaintiffs' claims would be
statute barred. On the appeals in the present case coming before the Court
of Appeal on 1st March 1976, that court, without further argument, following
Sparham-Souter's case, allowed the plaintiffs' appeal and gave leave to appeal
to this House. That appeal would, of course, have been confined to a pre-
liminary issue of limitation.
However before the appeal to this House came on, the second defendants
(the council) presented a petition, asking for leave to argue the question
whether the council was under any duty of care to the plaintiffs at all.
This question had not been considered by Judge Fay, or by the Court of
Appeal, because it was thought, rightly in my opinion, that it was concluded by
Dutton's case. Thus the council wished to challenge the correctness of the
latter decision. In that case the defendant Council of Bognor Regis was held
liable for damages in negligence (viz., negligent inspection by one of its officers),
consisting of a breach of a duty at common law to take reasonable care to see
that the byelaws were complied with. On 21st October 1976 this House
acceded to the petition. The appellants thus have leave to argue that in the
circumstances the council owed no duty of care to the plaintiffs.
This being a preliminary point of law, as was the argument on limitation,
it has to be decided on the assumption that the facts are as pleaded. There is
some difference between those facts and those on which Dutton's case was
based, and in the present case the plaintiffs rely not only upon negligent
inspection, but, in the alternative, upon a failure to make any inspections.