1

Neutral citation number: [2021] EWHC 1172 (Ch)

Case No: IL-2020-000109
IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUSTICE
BUSINESS AND PROPERTY COURTS OF ENGLAND AND WALES
INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LIST (ChD)

Royal Courts of Justice, Rolls Building
Fetter Lane, London, EC4A 1NL

11 May 2021

Before:

DEPUTY MASTER BRIGHTWELL
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
Between:

(1) CRYPTON DIGITAL ASSETS LIMITED
(2) CRYPTON PARTNER MANAGEMENT
LIMITED

Claimants

- and –

(1) BLOCKCHAIN LUXEMBOURG SA
(2) BLOCKCHAIN (GB) LIMITED
(3) STEPHEN JONES
(4) PETROS-ALEXANDROS KOUMPAS
(5) MARK CURTIS
(6) CASTRAMET LIMITED
Defendants

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -

James Sheehan (instructed by Ashurst LLP) for the Claimants
Sa’ad Hossain QC and Niranjan Venkatesan (instructed by Goodwin Procter (UK) LLP)
for the First and Second Defendants

Hearing date: 25 March 2021

2

Approved Judgment

I direct that this approved judgment, sent to the parties by email on 11 May 2021, shall
deemed to be handed down on that date, and copies of this version as handed down may be
treated as authentic.

.............................

3

Deputy Master Brightwell:
1.
By this application, the first and second defendants, Blockchain Luxembourg
SA and Blockchain (GB) Ltd (together, “Blockchain”) apply pursuant to CPR
Part 3.4 to strike out stated parts of the particulars of claim with the effect that
the causes of action in inducing breach of contract, dishonest assistance,
knowing or unconscionable receipt and unlawful means conspiracy be struck
out.
2.
The other defendants are not parties to the application, and have filed and
served defences to the claims against them (and, in the case of the sixth
defendant, Castramet Ltd, a counterclaim against the first claimant for services
provided). The other defendants were not represented at the hearing of the
application.
Background
3.
The claimants, Crypton Digital Assets Ltd and Crypton Partner Management
Ltd (together, “Crypton”), are described in the particulars of claim as
technology and research companies who have used a combination of
quantitative data science and artificial intelligence to develop what is itself
described at paragraph 9 (and elaborated further later in the document) as “a
valuable bespoke institutional-grade multi-asset high-frequency, low latency
trading platform using artificial intelligence, with a focus on digital assets,
specifically cryptocurrencies (the ‘Crypton Platform’)”. Given the nature of
the application, Blockchain has not yet filed a defence to the claim, but I note
that the other defendants all take significant issue with paragraph 9.
4.
In the particulars of claim, Crypton then summarises the claim. That summary
reads as follows:
“10. From August 2019 onwards, Crypton engaged in discussions and
negotiations with a number of third parties with a view to attracting
investment into Crypton. One such third party was Blockchain SA.
In late 2019 the negotiations between Crypton and Blockchain SA
developed into a proposed acquisition by Blockchain SA of the
entire share capital, business and assets of Crypton, including the
Crypton Platform.
11.
However, instead of seeing through the negotiations with Crypton to
a concluded acquisition, Blockchain instead entered into a wrongful
combination with Mr Jones, Mr Koumpas and Mr Curtis (and/or
Castramet) pursuant to which these individuals simply purported to
resign from Crypton and were engaged by Blockchain almost
immediately thereafter.

4

12.
Blockchain and the individual Defendants referred to above then
proceeded to solicit other key staff from Crypton, and (it is to be
inferred) Blockchain is now exploiting the Crypton Platform, using
Crypton’s intellectual property, and/or seeking to rebuild that
platform using the ideas and concepts used to create it, and the skill,
expertise and know-how of those of its employees and contractors
who had contributed to its development.
13.
Blockchain has made no payment of any kind to Crypton in return.
14.
As set out in more detail below, the wrongful combination between
the Defendants first involved Mr Jones, Mr Koumpas and Mr Curtis
seeking to take control of the process of negotiation between
Crypton and Blockchain SA, and of Crypton’s technology assets
and data. They did so:
14.1. With a view to ensuring that they were able to decide on
whether and (if so) on what terms the acquisition took place,
purporting in breach of duty to agree terms which were
contrary to Crypton’s interests and instead favoured
Blockchain SA and these individuals. Blockchain SA had
offered a bonus pool to transferring employees and, as Mr
Jones explained at the time, he wanted to “keep the head count
down” so that there was “more money in the pot for us”. Mr
Jones and Mr Koumpas used these negotiations with
Blockchain SA to secure an increase in the salary to be paid to
them personally after the acquisition.
14.2. Later, in order to enable them to exploit the opportunity
presented by Blockchain SA’s interest in Crypton’s business,
but without Blockchain SA having to acquire that business
from Crypton for value.
15.
In February 2020 this conduct culminated in the collapse of the
acquisition negotiations and in:
15.1. The near-simultaneous resignation from Crypton of Mr Jones,
Mr Koumpas and Mr Curtis, together with a number of more
junior members of staff who had been solicited by Mr Jones,
Mr Koumpas and Blockchain itself;
15.2. The Defendants’ pursuit of Crypton’s essential business
through Blockchain without any payment to Crypton;

5

15.3. The Defendants gaining control over the code on which the
Crypton Platform was built, and Crypton’s access to that code
and other valuable data being cut off; and
15.4. The resultant destruction of the entire value of Crypton’s
business.
16.
Crypton accordingly claims against each of the Defendants for
breach of fiduciary duty, breach of contract, infringement of
copyright, breach of confidence, inducing breach of contract,
dishonest assistance, unconscionable receipt and unlawful means
conspiracy, as set out in more detail below.”
5.
The particulars of claim then proceed to set out Crypton’s pleaded contentions
as to the fiduciary and contractual duties owed to Crypton by the defendants
(other than Blockchain) and third parties, and their pleaded contentions as to
the role of parties other than Blockchain in the development of a trading
platform for cryptocurrencies and as to the negotiations that took place
between Blockchain and Crypton for the acquisition by the former of
Crypton’s share capital (and, thus, assets).
6.
It is the section of the particulars of claim from paragraph 62 onwards, headed
“The Defendants’ wrongful appropriation of the Crypton Platform
Opportunity”, which was the main focus of the parties’ submissions at the
hearing, together with the pleaded statements of the elements of the various
causes of action relied on by Crypton. Each cause of action, set out from
paragraph 83 onwards, is particularised by a process of cross-reference back to
earlier pleaded allegations of fact. The extent of the reliance on cross-
referencing was one of Blockchain’s principal criticisms of the particulars of
claim.
7.
The particulars of claim were settled by Mr Brian Nicholson QC, leading Mr
James Sheehan. Mr Sheehan appeared for Crypton at the hearing of the
application. Blockchain was represented by Mr Sa’ad Hossain QC, together
with Mr Niranjan Venkatesan. I have been assisted by lucid submissions on
both sides.
8.
As I have noted, Blockchain applies to strike out those parts of the particulars
of claim which plead claims against Blockchain in inducing breach of
contract, dishonest assistance, (knowing or) unconscionable receipt and
unlawful means conspiracy. Blockchain therefore accepts that the claim that it
has infringed, and continues to infringe, Crypton’s intellectual property rights
(defined in paragraphs 38 to 44 as copyright works, at least some of which
also contained confidential information) should proceed.

6

Power to strike out statements of case: principles
9.
CPR Part 3.4(2)(a) provides as follows:
“(2) The court may strike out a statement of case if it appears to the court
–
(a) that the statement of case discloses no reasonable grounds for bringing
or defending the claim.”
10.
Blockchain also relies on paragraph 1.4 of Practice Direction 3A (and,
particularly, on sub-paragraphs (2) and (3)):
“The following are examples of cases where the court may conclude that
particulars of claim (whether contained in a claim form or filed
separately) fall within rule 3.4(2)(a):
(1) those which set out no facts indicating what the claim is about, for
example ‘Money owed £5000’,
(2) those which are incoherent and make no sense,
(3) those which contain a coherent set of facts but those facts, even if true,
do not disclose any legally recognisable claim against the defendant.”
11.
I should record that at the hearing Blockchain also put its application on the
footing that the applicable causes of action may be struck out pursuant to CPR
Part 3.4(2)(b), which refers to the court’s power to strike out statements of
case which are an abuse of the court’s process or are otherwise likely to
obstruct the just disposal of the proceedings. Mr Hossain clarified that this was
with particular regard to the way in which the particulars of claim are cross-
referenced. I have in considering the document taken care to ascertain the
allegations that are made in relation to each cause of action through this
process of cross-referencing, and I state my views on them below.
12.
It does seem to me that, to the extent that an allegation is clearly made through
a process of cross-referencing, it cannot be an abuse of process or obstruct the
just disposal of the proceedings and I do not discern a contrary view in Kaplan
v Super PCS LLP [2017] EWHC 1165 (Ch), relied on by Blockchain. Rose J
at [38] expressed the view that unnecessarily prolix particulars of claim that
failed fairly to identify the claims in a way that could be reasonably
understood, and where counsel for the claimant there accepted that they “still
needed quite a bit of surgery”, would fall foul of CPR Part 3.4(2)(b). The
central question is whether the claims, and their proper particulars, are fully
ascertainable. If not, the court should not allow them to proceed in their
current form.

7

13.
I consider this application on the assumption that the facts averred in the
particulars of claim are true, as I am bound to do: see Marsh v Chief Constable
of Lancashire [2003] EWCA Civ 284 at [2], per Potter LJ. Blockchain has
made clear its position that if the claims proceed they will be denied, and that
it alleges among other things that it was deliberately misled about various
aspects of Crypton’s corporate structure and business. That, however, is not
relevant to the instant application.
14.
I was addressed by Mr Hossain on the footing that the adequacy of Crypton’s
pleading is to be assessed by an essentially granular consideration of the
elements of each cause of action relied upon, and of the contents of the
particulars of claim, in order to determine whether each cause of action is
supported by pleadings of fact which, if established at trial, would enable each
element of each claim to succeed. Mr Sheehan did not demur from this
approach which is replicated, particularly, in his skeleton argument. He did,
however, urge against a formalistic approach, submitting that the claim in
conspiracy was unusually compelling, given the (alleged) concealment by
Blockchain and the other defendants of the appropriation of Crypton’s
business.
15.
The function of pleadings is, of course, to give the party opposite sufficient
notice of the case which is being made against it: Three Rivers District
Council v Bank of England (No.3) [2003] 2 AC 1 at [185]. Furthermore, each
of the claims which are the subject of the present application involve serious
allegations of wrongdoing, including claims of dishonesty. It is essential to
bear in mind the requirements of a pleading of dishonesty.
16.
In the Three Rivers case, Lord Millett, having described the function of
pleadings as the first principle, went on as follows, at [186]:
“The second principle, which is quite distinct, is that an allegation of fraud
or dishonesty must be sufficiently particularised, and that particulars of
facts which are consistent with honesty are not sufficient. This is only
partly a matter of pleading. It is also a matter of substance. As I have said,
the defendant is entitled to know the case he has to meet. But since
dishonesty is usually a matter of inference from primary facts, this
involves knowing not only that he is alleged to have acted dishonestly, but
also the primary facts which will be relied upon at trial to justify the
inference. At trial the court will not normally allow proof of primary facts
which have not been pleaded, and will not do so in a case of fraud. It is
not open to the court to infer dishonesty from facts which have not been
pleaded, or from facts which have been pleaded but are consistent with
honesty. There must be some fact which tilts the balance and justifies an
inference of dishonesty, and this fact must be both pleaded and proved.”

8

17.
The requirements of a plea of dishonesty have recently been summarised in
the following way, in Sofer v Swissindependent Trustees SA [2020] EWCA
Civ 699 at [23], per Arnold LJ:
“i) Fraud or dishonesty must be specifically alleged and sufficiently
particularised, and will not be sufficiently particularised if the facts
alleged are consistent with innocence: Three Rivers.

ii) Dishonesty can be inferred from primary facts, provided that those
primary facts are themselves pleaded. There must be some fact which
tilts the balance and justifies an inference of dishonesty, and this fact
must be pleaded: Three Rivers at [186] (Lord Millett).

iii) The claimant does not have to plead primary facts which are only
consistent with dishonesty. The correct test is whether or not, on the
basis of the primary facts pleaded, an inference of dishonesty is more
likely than one of innocence or negligence: JSC Bank of Moscow v
Kekhman [2015] EWHC 3073 (Comm) at [20]-[23] (Flaux J, as he then
was).

iv) Particulars of dishonesty must be read as a whole and in
context: Walker v Stones [2001] QB 902 at 944B (Sir Christopher
Slade).”
18.
Arnold LJ then made two further points at [24]. First, when giving particulars,
no more than a concise statement of the facts relied upon is required.
Secondly, unless there is some obvious purpose to be served by fighting over
the precise terms of a pleading, contests over their terms are to be discouraged.
See McPhilemy v Times Newspapers Ltd [1999] 3 All ER 775 at 793B (Lord
Woolf MR).
19.
Furthermore, it seems to me that the question whether a statement of case
discloses a coherent set of facts in support of a legally recognised cause of
action is something to be ascertained from the four corners of the document
itself. Information available elsewhere, for instance in a witness statement,
may justify giving a party the opportunity to apply to amend a deficient
statement of case, but it cannot suffice to save a statement of case that would
otherwise fall to be struck out. Crypton has served a witness statement, of Mr
Neil Staunton, the CEO of the first claimant, in response to the application. Mr
Sheehan did not at the hearing refer to Mr Staunton’s evidence (although he
did refer to a separate claim brought by Blockchain against Mr Staunton,
exhibited to his statement). There are three references to the witness statement
in Mr Sheehan’s skeleton argument, but he explicitly eschews reliance on
them in saying that it is unnecessary for those points to be pleaded, asserting

9

instead that they illustrate the dangers of striking out a claim where the
defendants are alleged to be concealing relevant facts. I do not consider that
point to justify the reliance on facts which could have been, but have not been,
pleaded. I have accordingly not further considered Mr Staunton’s witness
statement.
The particulars of claim
20.
Blockchain’s complaint in this application is that, in particular given the way
in which the particulars of claim have been prepared, with the facts set out
first and the causes of action against the various defendants pleaded by cross-
reference back to the facts, four of the five claims brought by Crypton against
Blockchain do not disclose any legally recognised cause of action.
21.
Blockchain contends that the allegations relating to the Blockchain companies,
as opposed to the other defendants, are unclear such that there has been a
disregard of the rules governing the pleading of dishonesty and of the
economic torts, both of which are serious allegations. That overarching
contention must be assessed by reference to each cause of action broken down
into its constituent elements. Before turning to do so, I have considered the
factual allegations in the particulars of claim in detail.
22.
The most relevant section, where the factual allegations of wrongdoing are set
out, and by reference to which the various causes are then pleaded, begins at
paragraph 62, with the allegation (focused on the claim in unlawful means
conspiracy, considered last below) that:
“62 On a date or dates prior to 14 February 2020, which Crypton is
presently unable to particularise further (but in respect of which it will
seek to plead further as appropriate upon provision of further information
upon disclosure or otherwise), Mr Jones and Mr Koumpas entered into a
combination or agreement to act in their own interests and against
Crypton’s interests with regard to the Crypton Platform Opportunity and
the proposed Blockchain SA acquisition. Mr Curtis (and/or Castramet)
and Blockchain were also party to the said combination or agreement….”
23.
The allegations in paragraphs 63 to 82 of the particulars of claim develop in
the following way, as far as Blockchain is concerned (i.e. without setting out
all the allegations against the other defendants, especially Messrs Jones and
Koumpas, which are more fully particularised in the document), as I
summarise below:
i)
The third to sixth defendants sought to take control of the negotiations
with Blockchain, by taking over negotiations with Blockchain on
Crypton’s behalf (paragraph 66), seeking to oust members of the board

10

of the first claimant (paragraph 67), and gaining control of Crypton’s
assets (paragraph 70), all in the interests of Blockchain. The third and
fourth defendants were directors of both claimant companies until 14
February 2020, and the fifth defendant resigned from the first claimant
on the same date.
ii)
The combination or agreement evolved into one pursuant to which the
Crypton Platform opportunity would be pursued through Blockchain,
without any payment to Crypton in return (paragraph 64). Crypton
believe that this evolution took place between 10 and 14 February 2020
(paragraph 72).
iii)
Mr Peter Smith, of Blockchain, made a statement on 13 February 2020
that Blockchain would not accept a board which was not controlled by
individuals moving to Blockchain, which matter was of no genuine or
commercial relevance to Blockchain, as the first defendant was
proposing to acquire the entire issued share capital of the first claimant
(paragraphs 67.4 and 68).
iv)
The attempts of the other defendants to gain control of the negotiations
and to gain control of the board of the first claimant, were supported by
Blockchain, and the motivation behind these actions was to act in the
interests of, inter alios, Blockchain. The reasons put forward by Mr
Smith were not genuine or legitimate (paragraph 69 and 69.1).
v)
Mr Koumpas purported on 10 February 2020 to terminate the contract
of a Mr Sewell (the nature of whose employment with Crypton is not
explained), a step taken in the interests of Blockchain and/or those of
Mr Jones and Mr Koumpas personally (paragraph 69.4).
vi)
Mr Jones and Mr Koumpas falsely represented to Mr Charlie
McGarraugh of Blockchain on 10 February 2020 that Mr Staunton had
agreed with them that he (Mr Staunton) would not join Blockchain
(paragraph 69.5.4).
vii)
Mr Jones signed a term sheet on behalf of the first claimant but without
its authority, at or shortly after a meeting attended by him and Mr
Koumpas at Blockchain’s London offices on 10 February 2020
(paragraph 69.6).
viii)
Blockchain solicited the resignation of key Crypton staff, Messrs
Tomáš Jirman, Giuseppe Calvi and Ilya Kisil, who are now employed
by Blockchain. The resignations of the third to fifth defendants, on 14
February 2020, “were obviously coordinated with Blockchain itself”
(paragraphs 73 to 75).

11

ix)
Blockchain, after the resignation from Crypton of the said individuals,
purported to create the impression of innocently withdrawing from
negotiations. The reasons put forward by Mr McGarraugh for
withdrawing from negotiations were, it is to be inferred, a false pretext
proffered in an attempt to justify its wrongful conduct (paragraph 78).
x)
The defendants are now exploiting the Crypton Platform opportunity
through Blockchain, and are making use of Crypton’s intellectual
property (paragraphs 80 to 82).
xi)
As a result of these matters (and others pleaded as against the other
defendants) Crypton is unable to exploit the Crypton Platform and its
existing business has effectively been destroyed (paragraph 82).
24.
While the adequacy of these allegations falls to be considered together with
the additional averments in relation to each individual cause of action, I would
at the outset comment that it would not be accurate to say that Blockchain’s
own involvement in the events said to constitute the combination or agreement
relied on are wholly unpleaded.
Inducing breach of contract
25.
The requirements of the tort of inducing breach of contract were set out by
Arden LJ (as she then was) in Meretz Investments NV v ACP Ltd [2008] Ch
244 at [114], by reference to the then recent decision of the House of Lords in
OBG Ltd v Allan [2008] 1 AC 1:
“For inducing breach of contract the essential elements were knowledge
of the contract, intention to induce a breach of the contract and actual
breach of contract. Accordingly, to be liable, a person must know that his
action will result in a breach of contract….The defendant’s conduct must
actually have caused a breach of that contract.”
26.
The breaches of contract which it is alleged that Blockchain has induced in
relation to Mr Jones and Mr Koumpas are pleaded at paragraph 85.6 to 85.8
(the inducement allegations against Blockchain are then found at paragraphs
94 to 96). These refer to the misuse of and failure to deliver up Crypton’s
intellectual property, a breach of the non-competition clauses in the
employment contracts of Mr Jones and Mr Koumpas, and a breach of the non-
solicitation and related clauses in those contracts concerning the solicitation of
other employees. There is then a separate allegation that Mr Jirman, Mr Calvi
and Mr Kisil all breached their service contracts in resigning without notice,
and that Blockchain intentionally induced these breaches of contract (see
paragraphs 97 to 99).
27.
Mr Hossain makes three objections to the pleading of this cause of action.

12

i)
First, it is said that Crypton has not properly pleaded the conduct said
to constitute inducement.
ii)
Secondly, there is no averment that Blockchain knew the acts it
allegedly induced constituted breaches of contract.
iii)
Thirdly, it is not properly pleaded that Blockchain intended to induce
the pleaded breaches of contract.
28.
It is established that, for conduct to be capable of constituting inducement,
there must be some conduct by A amounting to persuasion, encouragement or
assistance of B to break the contract with C. As a matter of causation, A’s
conduct must also be capable of influencing B’s choice whether or not to
break the contract: Kawasaki Kishen Kaisha Ltd v James Kemball Ltd [2021]
EWCA Civ 33 at [32]–[33], per Popplewell LJ.
29.
Mr Hossain submits that it is difficult if not impossible to discern from the
particulars of claim what conduct of Blockchain is said to constitute the
inducement of the breaches of contract pleaded at paragraph 85.6 to 85.8. Mr
Sheehan responds by saying that Crypton is not able to particularise in detail
all the acts of inducement, as they are particularly within the knowledge of the
defendants, but that the whole scheme has involved inducement of the pleaded
breaches of contract by Mr Jones and Mr Koumpas. He relies on Blockchain
allegedly having had dealings with Mr Jones and Mr Koumpas that
Blockchain knew to be inconsistent with their contracts with Crypton.
30.
In the Kawasaki Kishen Kaisha case, at [42], Popplewell LJ said that such
inconsistent dealings may be capable of constituting inducement because they
amount to the requisite persuasion, encouragement or assistance. He cited and
approved the judgment of Lord Hodge (sitting in the Outer House) in Global
Resources Group v Mackay [2008] SLT 104 at [13]:
“Fourthly, A must induce B to break his contract with C by persuading,
encouraging or assisting him to do so….It is clear from BMTA v
Salvadori and BMTA v Gray that the tort or delict is not confined to
circumstances where A has to persuade B to break his contract but can
also be committed where A has dealings with B which A knows are
inconsistent with the contract between B and C. In either event A induces
or assists B to do something (or to refrain from doing something) which
involves B breaking his contract with C.”
31.
It is in fact expressly pleaded that Blockchain coordinated the resignations of
Messrs Jones, Koumpas and Curtis (paragraph 74.2), and that Blockchain
solicited the resignation of the other named employees. As a matter of plain
language, I consider the allegation that resignations were coordinated or

13

solicited by Blockchain to constitute a pleading that Blockchain persuaded,
encouraged or assisted the relevant resignations in breach of contract. I
therefore consider that Crypton has pleaded the conduct on the part of
Blockchain said to constitute an inducement to commit the breaches
particularised at paragraph 85.7 and 85.8.
32.
To the extent that such conduct is not further particularised and as far as
paragraph 85.6, the alleged misuse of Crypton’s intellectual property, is
concerned, I consider that Crypton must rely and is entitled to rely on the
allegation of inconsistent dealings, as explained above. Crypton has pleaded a
course of conduct in the days around 14 February 2020 according to which
Blockchain collaborated with the other defendants in procuring the resignation
from Crypton and employment with Blockchain of the various named actors,
following which the use of the Crypton Platform, including identified
intellectual property rights, would be pursued through Blockchain. Crypton
pleads at paragraph 74.2 that none of the individuals concerned would have
sought to resign from Crypton without an assurance of future employment
from Blockchain, on beneficial terms. I consider these offers of employment,
and the use of Crypton’s intellectual property, to be a pleaded inconsistent
dealing such that Crypton has sufficiently pleaded that Blockchain persuaded,
encouraged or assisted the relevant breaches of contract.
33.
Secondly, Blockchain submits that, while Crypton’s knowledge of the relevant
contractual terms is pleaded, its knowledge that the conduct in question was in
breach of contract is not alleged. I disagree. The suggestion, that the plea of
knowledge of the contractual terms, together with the acts alleged, does not
comprise an allegation that there was also subjective knowledge that the
conduct allegedly induced constituted a breach of those obligations, seems to
me to be wholly unrealistic. As Lord Nicholls of Birkenhead said in OBG Ltd
v Allan [2008] 1 AC 1 at [192], intentional interference presupposes
knowledge of the contract and that the defendant induced the other contracting
party to act in a way the defendant knew was a breach of that party’s
obligations under the contract. There is such a plea of intentional inducement
at paragraph 96 of the particulars of claim.
34.
Thirdly, it is objected that Crypton does not plead that Blockchain intended to
induce the breaches of contract pleaded at paragraph 85.6 to 85.8. It is said
that the plea of intentional inducement does not suffice because the specific
facts relied on in support of the allegation must be pleaded. What is alleged is
that Blockchain coordinated and solicited the resignations of employees,
knowing the terms of their contracts with Crypton, which would be breached
by such action. It is further alleged that Blockchain engaged in a course of
dealing inconsistent with these contracts, as I have already mentioned.
Standing back and considering the pleaded allegation of intentional

14

inducement in the light of these allegations, read in the context of the
particulars of claim as a whole, I cannot agree that Crypton has failed to plead
the facts upon which they rely in support of their allegation of intention.
35.
Mr Sheehan refers also to CF Partners (UK) LLP v Barclays Bank plc [2014]
EWHC 3049 (Ch) at [869], per Hildyard J, where he said (citing Clerk &
Lindsell on Torts, 20th edn, at 24–15) that, “where knowledge is proved on the
part of a defendant who induces one party to break [a contract] intention will
readily be inferred”. As a separate point it seems to me properly arguable that
intention may be inferred from the primary fact of knowledge, which I
consider to be adequately pleaded for reasons I have already given. Put
simply, it is hard to imagine any plausible factual scenario where Blockchain
acted as alleged, with the knowledge of the contracts alleged, without having
intended to bring about a breach of contract.
36.
I am equally satisfied that the claim is sufficiently pleaded in relation to the
alleged breaches by Messrs Jirman, Calvi and Kisil. The objections taken by
Blockchain are essentially the same.
37.
Paragraph 75 of the particulars of claim pleads that they all purported to resign
from Crypton between 14 and 16 February 2020 after solicitation from Mr
Jones, Mr Koumpas and Blockchain. Paragraph 75.6 pleads that none of them
would have resigned without an assurance of future employment by
Blockchain. The conduct that is alleged to constitute inducement is, therefore,
pleaded. Paragraph 99 pleads that in so soliciting them, Mr Jones, Mr
Koumpas and Blockchain intentionally induced the alleged breaches of
contract. I do not agree that this leaves Blockchain unclear whether each of the
named defendants induced all the breaches while others induced only some –
it is plainly alleged that Blockchain solicited all three, including by making an
offer of employment to all of them, which they each accepted.
38.
To the extent that the second and third objections raised against paragraph
85.6 to 85.8 are repeated in relation to the alleged breaches by Messrs Jirman,
Calvi and Kisil, I reject them for the reasons given at paragraphs 33 to 35
above.
39.
Accordingly, I consider that the particulars of claim disclose reasonable
grounds for bringing the claim against Blockchain for inducing breach of
contract and I decline to strike it out.
Dishonest assistance
40.
Crypton also pursues a claim for dishonest assistance in the breaches of
fiduciary duty pleaded against Mr Jones and Mr Koumpas. There must be a
breach of trust for this cause of action, but it is well established that the breach

15

of his fiduciary duties by a company director will cause him to be a
constructive trustee of the company’s property for these purposes: see Lewin
on Trusts, 20th edn, at 43–026. The claimant must also plead and prove that
the defendant induced or assisted the relevant breach or breaches of trust and
that it was dishonest in doing so.
41.
Crypton again pleads this cause of action by cross-reference, at paragraphs
100 to 102 of the particulars of claim. The breaches of fiduciary duty on which
Crypton relies are set out at paragraph 83. The conduct relied on as
constituting inducement or assistance is then pleaded, by reference, at
paragraphs 72 to 81.
42.
Blockchain submits first that this element of the claim is not properly pleaded
because the particulars of claim do not identify which of the alleged breaches
Crypton can properly contend that Blockchain assisted.
43.
Paragraph 83 pleads three categories of alleged breach of fiduciary duty. It is
said that Mr Jones and Mr Koumpas acted in breach of these duties in:
i)
Seeking to oust other members of the board of the first claimant, and to
gain control of Crypton’s technology and assets and data, as pleaded in
paragraphs 66 to 71.
ii)
Soliciting Mr Jirman, Mr Calvi and Mr Kisil to join Blockchain, as
pleaded in paragraph 75.
iii)
Generally, in pursuing the Crypton Platform opportunity, as pleaded in
paragraphs 72 to 81.
44.
There are allegations of Blockchain’s actual involvement in the matters
pleaded at paragraphs 66 to 71: see the summary at paragraph 23(iii) to (iv)
above. Mr Sheehan relies on these allegations in this respect. However, I agree
with Mr Hossain that paragraph 101 explicitly refers only to paragraphs 72 to
81 for the acts of assistance relied on, and this does not obviously refer to any
assistance with the matters pleaded at paragraphs 66 to 71. I also agree with
him that Crypton has not pleaded that Blockchain induced the breaches of
contract alleged at paragraph 85.1, which reflect the relevant alleged breaches
of fiduciary duty. Whilst it is possible for a defendant to assist in a breach of
fiduciary duty without inducing it, it is far from clear to me that this is what
Crypton has sought to allege, as far as paragraphs 66 to 71 are concerned.
45.
As to the next allegation, that Mr Jones and Mr Koumpas breached their
fiduciary duties in soliciting Mr Jirman, Mr Calvi and Mr Kisil to join
Blockchain, I consider that Blockchain’s inducement or assistance is properly
pleaded. Paragraph 75 itself alleges that Blockchain itself solicited these
employees, and that it provided them with an assurance of future employment.

16

The allegation that this was all done as part of a combination also supports the
claim that Blockchain was assisting Mr Jones and Mr Koumpas in the
breaches of fiduciary duty alleged against them.
46.
This leaves the final alleged breach of fiduciary duty, whereby it is claimed
that Blockchain generally assisted Mr Jones and Mr Koumpas in pursuing the
Crypton Platform opportunity (as set out in paragraph 72 and particularised in
the following paragraphs). In this regard, I consider that the acts summarised
at paragraph 23(viii) to (x) above are capable of constituting assistance with
the alleged breaches of fiduciary duty. These acts are the solicitation of the
resignation of other members of staff, and the ongoing use of Crypton’s assets
and intellectual property. The latter breach of fiduciary duty is alleged by
paragraph 83.2 to be ongoing.
47.
Accordingly, before considering Blockchain’s further objection, that
dishonesty is not sufficiently pleaded, I record that I consider that no acts of
assistance are properly pleaded in relation to the first category of alleged
breach of fiduciary duty, at paragraphs 66 to 71 of the particulars of claim. As
I indicate at the conclusion of this judgment, I consider that Crypton should if
it is so advised have an opportunity to seek to amend in this regard. If need be,
however, the striking out of the relevant allegation of assistance cannot be
achieved merely by deleting some words from the particulars of claim,
because of the process of cross-referencing adopted.
48.
Blockchain then contends that the allegation of dishonesty is not properly
pleaded, with regard to the principles concerning pleadings of dishonest
conduct, as set out at paragraphs 15 to 18 above. The relevant allegations of
dishonesty are found at paragraph 102, as follows:
“102 [The conduct of Blockchain pleaded in paragraphs 72 to 81] was
dishonest by ordinary standards. In support of that contention Crypton
relies on the following:
102.1
Blockchain had knowledge of, alternatively was reckless as to,
the non-solicitation, non-competition and notice obligations to
which Mr Jones and Mr Koumpas were subject and the notice
obligations under the Contracts for Services.
102.2
Blockchain (including in particular Mr McGarraugh) must
have known that it was wrong for Mr Jones and Mr Koumpas as
directors of Crypton DA and Crypton PM, having spent
significant time and effort developing the Crypton Platform (and
overseeing its development by others) and thus creating the
Crypton Platform Opportunity, instead to exploit that opportunity
outside of Crypton.

17

102.3
It was in any event dishonest by ordinary standards for
Blockchain (acting in particular through Mr McGarraugh), having
pursued negotiations for an acquisition of Crypton in return for
payments of significant value, for several months and to an
advanced stage, to decide instead to exploit the Crypton Platform
Opportunity for itself, having been involved in the solicitation of
Crypton’s staff as pleaded in paragraph 75 above, and without
any payment to Crypton.
102.4
Blockchain SA put forward reasons for withdrawing from the
negotiations with Crypton which were not genuine commercial
reasons but a false pretext put forward in an attempt to justify its
conduct, as set out in paragraph 78 above.”
49.
I remind myself that as dishonesty is usually inferred the claimants must plead
primary facts from which such an inference is more likely than an inference of
innocence or negligence.
50.
I consider that each of the allegations set out at paragraph 102 are allegations
which are, read as a whole and in context and if all the factual averments made
by Crypton are true, more likely to lead to an inference of dishonesty than an
inference of innocence or negligence:
i)
The allegation that Blockchain knew or was reckless as to the relevant
contractual obligations of Mr Jones and Mr Koumpas (and the other
relevant employees) is not made in vacuo. It is made in the context of
an allegation that Blockchain combined to procure breaches of others’
employment contracts and to compete with Crypton. I do not agree that
this could be read as an allegation that Blockchain merely knew the
terms of the employees’ previous contracts of employment.
ii)
The first allegation must be read together with paragraph 102.2, which
is an allegation that Blockchain knew that it was wrong for Mr Jones
and Mr Koumpas as directors (i.e. as fiduciaries) to exploit an
opportunity belonging to Crypton outside of Crypton.
iii)
The allegation at paragraph 102.3, which is a plain plea of dishonesty,
is placed squarely in the context of the alleged assistance of Mr Jones
and Mr Koumpas in soliciting staff, and in exploiting the Crypton
Platform opportunity together with them. It is not just a plea of primary
wrongdoing.
iv)
The allegation that Blockchain put forward a false pretextual
explanation might not justify a finding of dishonesty when divorced
from all other allegations, but it is expressly linked to a plea that

18

Blockchain was not innocently withdrawing from negotiations. If
found to be true, that plea would justify an inference of dishonesty not
least as it thus clearly refers back to the allegation (pleaded
immediately before, in paragraphs 73 to 77) that Blockchain assisted
Mr Jones and Mr Koumpas in soliciting the resignation and re-
employment by Blockchain of other employees, in what is said to be a
breach of fiduciary duty on their part.
51.
I therefore consider that the claim in dishonest assistance is sufficiently
pleaded in relation to the second and third categories of alleged breach of
fiduciary duty set out at paragraph 43 above.
Knowing or unconscionable receipt
52.
Paragraph 103 of the particulars of claim reads as follows:
“Insofar as Blockchain has received any of Crypton’s assets (including,
without limitation, Crypton’s Intellectual Property) by reason of the
breaches of fiduciary duty of Mr Jones and Mr Koumpas pleaded in
paragraph 83 above, in the circumstances pleaded above such receipt was
unconscionable. Crypton reserves the right to seek to plead further in this
respect upon disclosure or otherwise.”
53.
This is the extent of the plea for relief for Blockchain’s alleged knowing or
unconscionable receipt. When I first read this paragraph, I did not understand
it to pursue a remedy at present, but to reserve the right to do so in the event
that Crypton later became aware that they were able to do so. Mr Sheehan has,
however, indicated that this is a claim which is presently maintained.
54.
It is clear that one of the elements of this cause of action, which must be
pleaded and proved by a claimant, is that the defendants have received
property subject to a trust. This may include property owned by a company but
subject to the fiduciary duties of the directors: see Lewin on Trusts, 20th edn,
at 42–036.
55.
I do not consider that paragraph 103 of the particulars of claim contains a plea
that property subject to a trust in this sense has been received by Blockchain.
Furthermore, the absence of any such pleading means that it is not possible, by
reference to allegations elsewhere in the document, to identify whether it is
alleged that any receipts are sufficiently connected to the pleaded breaches of
fiduciary duty and to Blockchain’s knowledge of them.
56.
Accordingly, paragraph 103 as pleaded does not disclose reasonable grounds
for bringing a claim in knowing or unconscionable receipt.

19

Unlawful means conspiracy
57.
A conspiracy to injure by unlawful means is actionable where the claimant
proves that it has suffered loss or damage as a result of unlawful action taken
pursuant to a combination or agreement between the defendant and another
person or persons to injure it by unlawful means, whether or not it is the
predominant purpose of the defendant to do so: Kuwait Oil Tanker SAK v Al
Bader [2000] 2 All ER (Comm) 271 at [108], per Nourse LJ. Mr Hossain
submits by reference to this test that Crypton must plead (a) a combination or
agreement between a defendant and others, (b) an intention of injuring the
claimants by the use of unlawful means, (c) the use of unlawful means
pursuant to the combination or agreement, and (d) loss caused accordingly. I
agree with this statement of the elements of the cause of action. It is now clear,
following the very recent decision of the Court of Appeal in Racing
Partnership Ltd v Done Bros (Cash Betting) Ltd [2021] 2 WLR 469, that a
claimant in an unlawful means conspiracy claim does not need to plead and
prove that the defendant knew that the means used were unlawful.
58.
Crypton’s pleading as to unlawful means conspiracy is contained within
paragraphs 104 to 106 of the particulars of claim, which cross-refer back to
paragraphs 62 to 81 as to the combination or agreement and the acts carried
out pursuant to it, and to paragraphs 69.5 and 83 to 103 as to the unlawful acts
alleged to have been carried out. There is also the following plea at paragraph
105:
“The Defendants intended by such combination or agreement to injure
Crypton, in particular in that such injury was the obverse side of the coin
to the financial gain which they sought for themselves by the exploitation
of the Crypton Platform Opportunity.”
59.
Blockchain submits that there are five essential flaws in this plea of unlawful
means conspiracy:
i)
First, it says that there is no proper plea that Blockchain was party to a
combination.
ii)
Secondly, there is no proper plea that Blockchain shared the two
alleged objects of the combination.
iii)
Thirdly, it is not alleged that it was an object of the combination to
injure Crypton by the use of unlawful means.
iv)
Fourthly, it is not alleged that Blockchain knew of and agreed to the
use of the unlawful means, or that it knew of the facts that rendered the
use of those means unlawful.

20

v)
Finally, it is said that the unlawful acts themselves are not properly
pleaded or particularised.
60.
The adequacy of the pleading of this cause of action needs to be considered
with particular reference to the underlying facts that are alleged. I have set out
at paragraph 23 above what I consider to be the most pertinent factual
allegations relating particularly to Blockchain in connection with the alleged
combination or agreement.
61.
The acts said to be unlawful means are then pleaded as follows:
i)
Those pleaded at paragraph 69.5 are false representations allegedly
made by Mr Jones and Mr Koumpas. It appears from the opening
words of paragraph 69 that Blockchain is alleged to have supported the
attempts of Mr Jones and Mr Koumpas to gain control of negotiations,
and that paragraph 69.5 contains some of the particulars made in
support of this allegation.
ii)
Mr Jones and Mr Koumpas are alleged to have breached their fiduciary
duties to the claimant companies (paragraph 83). Blockchain had
knowledge of at least some of the fiduciary obligations to which they
were subjected (paragraph 102.1 and 102.2).
iii)
It is alleged that Mr Jones and Mr Koumpas acted in breach of their
contracts of employment (paragraphs 17 to 21, 84 and 85), likewise Mr
Curtis (or Castramet Ltd) (paragraphs 23 and 24, 86 to 89). There is a
plea that their wrongful actions were done in combination with
Blockchain. Blockchain had knowledge of the said contractual
obligations and/or was reckless as to whether they existed (paragraphs
95 and 98).
iv)
It is then alleged that the defendants have individually and/or as part of
a common design infringed Crypton’s intellectual property rights.
v)
Crypton then rely on the other causes of action pleaded against
Blockchain, namely inducing breach of contract, dishonest assistance
and unconscionable receipt (as discussed above).
62.
Returning to Blockchain’s five objections to the pleading of unlawful means
conspiracy, the first was that there is no proper plea that Blockchain was party
to a combination. When considering the pleaded allegations that I have
summarised at paragraph 23 above, I cannot accept Blockchain’s submission
that it is wholly unparticularised beyond the mere allegation that there was a
combination or agreement.

21

63.
Mr Sheehan refers me to the judgment of Nourse LJ in the Kuwait Oil Tanker
case, at [111], where he said that the very existence of an agreement can only
be inferred from overt acts. Furthermore, the judge said that, for there to be an
actionable conspiracy, “the parties to [the combination or agreement] must be
sufficiently aware of the surrounding circumstances and share the same object
for it properly to be said that they were acting in concert at the time of the acts
complained of”. I consider that the overt acts which it is alleged Blockchain
carried out before and after 14 February 2020 are acts from which a
combination involving Blockchain could be inferred. It is pleaded that at least
some of the relevant pleaded acts were coordinated with Blockchain. I further
consider that a trial judge could find that the matters pleaded by Crypton as to
Blockchain’s involvement lead, in the absence of satisfactory explanation, to
the necessary inference that Blockchain was a member of the combination: see
Bird v O’Neal [1960] AC 907 at 920–921.
64.
The second objection taken by Blockchain is that it is not pleaded that it
shared the alleged objects of the combination. The pleaded common ends are
in relation to a combination or agreement “to act in [Mr Jones’ and Mr
Koumpas’] interests and against Crypton’s interests with regard to the Crypton
Platform Opportunity and the proposed Blockchain SA acquisition”. It is
pleaded in the particulars of claim at paragraphs 63 onwards that Blockchain
in several ways supported Mr Jones and Mr Koumpas (and to a lesser extent
the other defendants) in taking steps which led to Blockchain acquiring
Crypton’s assets and business value, and then giving spurious reasons for
breaking off negotiations a few days after several key employees had taken up
employment with Blockchain. I consider that a court could find that these
facts, if proven at trial, are consistent only with a shared object as pleaded at
paragraph 62. Indeed, this would be a far more likely inference than one of
innocent involvement when one considers the circumstances as pleaded in the
particulars of claim as a whole.
65.
Blockchain’s third objection is that there is no plea that there was an intention
on the part of Blockchain to injure Crypton by unlawful means. I tend to agree
with Mr Hossain that the pleading on this point does not emerge as clearly as
it might or, indeed, as it should. Nonetheless, I do not consider that the reader
of the particulars of claim could be left in any sensible doubt on this point. In
particular, the plea at paragraphs 72 to 74 is that the combination sought to
achieve the ends of the third to fifth defendants and others leaving Crypton for
Blockchain and the pursuit of the Crypton Platform opportunity without
payment to Crypton, and was coordinated with Blockchain. When coupled
with the pleas as to infringement of intellectual property rights, and as to
Blockchain’s knowledge of the employment contracts and of the fiduciary
duties owed by Mr Jones and Mr Koumpas (the breaches of which it is alleged

22

that Blockchain induced or dishonestly assisted), the intention to injure
Crypton by the use of unlawful means is, in my view, adequately pleaded.
66.
There was some discussion at the hearing about the theoretical possibility of a
combination forming initially to carry out some object by lawful means, with
the proposed use of unlawful means later being introduced into the equation.
In such circumstances, it would have to be pleaded that each defendant was a
party to the combination, with the relevant knowledge, at a time when the use
of unlawful means was proposed. In this case, it is clearly pleaded that
Blockchain was a part of the alleged combination in the form into which it
evolved by around 10 to 14 February 2020, when it was alleged to be
coordinating resignations. I accept that it is understandable that Crypton is in
no position to plead a precise date.
67.
The fourth objection raised is that it is not alleged that Blockchain knew of
and agreed to the use of unlawful means, or that it knew of the facts that
rendered the use of those means unlawful. I reject this submission for the
reasons I have given in relation to the third objection. Whilst it is not expressly
pleaded in terms that Blockchain knew that there was to be an infringement of
Crypton’s intellectual property rights, it is so implicit in the pleading (at
paragraph 90) that Blockchain entered into a common design to exploit the
Crypton Platform opportunity, that it must have known and agreed to the
matters that rendered the alleged intellectual property infringements unlawful.
I consider that it would defy all reason to suggest otherwise.
68.
Blockchain’s knowledge of the contractual obligations relating to Crypton’s
intellectual property rights, and of the non-competition and non-solicitation
clauses in the employment contracts of Mr Jones and Mr Koumpas, is pleaded
in the particulars of claim at paragraph 95. Furthermore, Blockchain’s
knowledge of the fiduciary duties said to be owed by them to the claimants,
including the fundamental duty to avoid conflicts of interest (see Companies
Act 2006, s.175) is pleaded at paragraph 102.2.
69.
I consider that the explicit pleas as to Blockchain’s knowledge of the pleaded
employment contracts and fiduciary duties, and its pleaded involvement in the
breach of those duties, constitute a plea that Blockchain knew of and agreed to
a combination to use breaches of those contracts and duties in furtherance of
the objects of that combination. This is a far cry from the position in TCP
Europe Ltd v Perry [2012] EWHC 1940 (QB), on which Blockchain relied,
where it was not alleged that certain defendants were aware of any certain
fiduciary or contractual obligation at all, see at [38].
70.
Furthermore, as Mr Sheehan submitted, a plea of knowledge of the unlawful
means (which now means knowledge of the means rather than of their
unlawfulness) can hardly be necessary in relation to acts which it is alleged

23

that the defendant in question has itself committed. It is alleged that
Blockchain has itself unlawfully infringed Crypton’s intellectual property
rights and that it has induced breaches of contract and dishonestly assisted in
breaches of fiduciary duty. I also agree with Mr Sheehan that once it is
pleaded that the relevant defendants were part of the combination to use
whatever means might present themselves (to include sufficiently identified
unlawful means known to the relevant defendants), it does not need to be
pleaded that they were fully aware of the circumstances of each act, as long as
it is pleaded that the acts of the other defendants were within the scope of the
combination: see Kuwait Oil Tanker SAK v Al Bader [2000] 2 All ER (Comm)
271 at [133].
71.
The final objection taken by Blockchain is that the allegedly unlawful acts
carried out pursuant to the combination are not properly pleaded or
particularised. As noted above, paragraph 106 of the particulars of claim
cross-refers to paragraph 69.5, which refers to a number of alleged false
representations made by Mr Jones and Mr Koumpas (including one to
Blockchain as representee) and to paragraphs 83 to 103, where the other
causes of action are enumerated and pleaded.
72.
As to paragraph 69.5, Mr Hossain submits that no actionable wrong is
pleaded, but merely bare fraudulent representations on which nobody relied.
He submits that Stocznia Gdanska SA v Latvian Shipping Co [2001] 1 Lloyd’s
Rep 537 at [304], per Thomas J, is authority for the proposition that a false
statement which is not itself actionable is not a relevant unlawful act. Mr
Sheehan responds with reliance on the decision of Andrew Smith J in Fiona
Trust & Holding Corp v Privalov [2010] EWHC 3199 (Comm), at [69], where
he said that the law does not require that the unlawful means should
themselves be actionable at the suit of the claimant, commenting that the
means may be, inter alia, a fraud. It seems to me that both parties’ positions
are properly arguable and that, where the law appears to be unclear, it would
be inappropriate to strike the allegation out.
73.
Mr Hossain submits finally that, from the other paragraphs cross-referenced in
the particulars of claim at paragraph 106, it is difficult if not impossible to
identify precisely which acts are relied upon as the unlawful means. Whilst I
again agree that the particulars of claim could perhaps have benefited from
clearer signposting, if not less cross-referencing, I do not on analysis find it
unduly difficult to identify the relevant unlawful means. They are the breaches
of contract and fiduciary duty, to which the other defendants have pleaded a
defence, and the causes of action which I have already indicated are
sufficiently pleaded, plus the alleged intellectual property infringements which
Blockchain does not seek to strike out.

24

Conclusion
74.
For the reasons I have given above, I conclude that the claim in dishonest
assistance is not sufficiently particularised to the extent that it does not allege
acts of assistance with the breaches of fiduciary duty pleaded at paragraphs 66
to 71 of the particulars of claim, and that the claim in knowing or
unconscionable receipt is unsustainable as pleaded. Otherwise, I consider the
disputed causes of action to be adequately pleaded. The application therefore
succeeds to only a limited extent.
75.
I have paid regard in considering the particulars of claim to the principles
relating to pleading, especially those concerning the pleading of allegations of
dishonest conduct. I agree that the lack of signposting in the document, and
the way in which it is cross-referenced, mean that it may not be quite as easy
to navigate as it could be. However, I consider that the constituent elements of
those causes of action that I permit to continue as they are pleaded do, on a
careful reading, emerge with some clarity such that reasonable grounds for
pursuing them are disclosed. The particulars of claim are a very long way from
being likely to obstruct the just disposal of the proceedings.
76.
As far as those elements of the claim which are not sufficiently pleaded are
concerned, Crypton should have an opportunity to amend. Where a defect in a
statement of case is capable of being cured by amendment, the court should
generally refrain from striking out without giving such an opportunity: Bord
Na Mona Horticulture Ltd v British Polythene Industries plc [2012] EWHC
3346 (Comm) at [29]. If Crypton wishes to avail itself of this opportunity, any
proposed amendments should be served on Blockchain within 14 days of the
handing down of this judgment, for its agreement or objection.
77.
Finally, I would note that I received submissions, by reference to the Bord Na
Mona Horticulture case and the decisions cited within it, on the question
whether the more generous ambit given to claimants in claims for
infringements of competition law by cartels, which are by their nature
clandestine, applies more generally to claims in conspiracy. For the avoidance
of doubt, I have not considered it necessary to decide this point in order to
determine the application. The unlawful means conspiracy claim is sufficiently
pleaded without the need for separate reliance on this principle.
