2 #
~*>7
IN THE SUPREME. COURT OF JUDICATURE',
COURT OF APPEAL.
Royal Courts of Justice,
Thursday, 26th June^
1952.
Before:
THE MASTER OF THE ROLLS
(Sir Raymond Ever she d),
LORD JUSTICE JENKINS and
LORD JUSTICE MORRIS.
D. C. THOMSON & COMPANY. LIMITED
v.
ARTHUR DEAKIN and OTHERS.
J U D G M E N T .

© Crown Copyright 1982
THE ASSOCIATION OF OFFICIAL
SHORTHANDWRiTERS, LTD.
Room 392
2 NEW SQUARE
ROYAL COURTS OF JUSTICE
LINCOLN'S INN
W.C2
Telephone: 01-405 9884

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF JUDICATURE,
COURT OF APPEAL.
Royal Courts of Justice,
Thursday, 26th June,
1952.
Before:
THE MASTER OF THE ROLLS
(Sir Raymond Evershed),
LORD JUSTICE JENKINS and
LORD JUSTICE MORRIS.
D. C. THOMSON & COMPANY, LIMITED
v.
ARTHUR DEAKIN and OTHERS.
(Transcript of the Shorthand Notes of The Association of Official
Shorthandwriters, Ltd., Room 392, Royal Courts of Justice, and
2, New Square, Lincoln's Inn, London, W.C.2.).
MR. GILBERT H. BEYFUS, Q.C., MR. M. D. VAN OSS and MR.
PATRICK BENNETT (instructed by Messrs. Neish, Howell &
Haldane) appeared on behalf of the Appellants
(Plaintiffs).
MR. GERALD A. GARDINER, Q.C., and MR. M. R. NICHOLAS
(instructed by Messrs. Pattinson & Brewer) appeared on
behalf of the Respondents (Defendants) Deakin, Wood and
Intin.
SIR HARTLEY SHAWCROSS, Q.C., and MR. I. J. LINDNER
(instructed by Messrs. Shaen, Roscoe & Co.) appeared on
behalf of the Respondents (Defendants) Briginshaw and
Moncrieff.
SIR FRANK SOSKICE, Q.C., MR. JOHN THOMPSON and MR. COLIN
FAWCETT (instructed by Messrs. W. H. Thompson)
appeared on behalf of the Respondent (Defendant)
Morrison.
J U D G M E N T .
1.

THE MASTER OF THE ROLLS: The appeal in this case from Mr. Justice
Upjohn's order has involved a consideration of many important,
novel and difficult questiona. In the ordinary way, therefore,
I should have wished and thought it right to reserve my
judgment, but it has been made plain that the case is one of
considerable urgency for the parties concerned, who may indeed
desire to take this matter further; and it is moreover an inter­
locutory application.
In those circumstanceB, having reached
my conclusion on these matters, I hove thought it right and in
the best interests of the parties that I should deliver my
judgment, with such inelegancies as it may contain, at onoe.
I have said that the matter comes before us upon an
interlocutory application. The courts have long exercised
beneficial powers of granting interlocutory relief by way of
injunction pending the trial of an action and in proper cases
they have thereby prevented undoubtedly what otherwise might
have been grave injury to the plaintiff - injury which could
not have been put right or effectively remedied by any order made
on the trial.
So indeed the learned judge in the present case has
formed the view that the acts of which the plaintiffs complain,
if allowed to continue, will cause what he called irreparable
injury to the plaintiffs in their business. That is not to say
that on that ground alone the court will grant injunctions; nor
has Mr. Beyfus so argued. He must indeed, as he concedes, at
least show that he has got a prima facie case or, if you will,
a strong prima facie case that the plaintiffs are entitled to
the remedy they seek. If they go so far, then I have no doubt
that the courts will, where necessary, grant an injunction in
mandatory form.
The question then is: Have the plaintiffs established
on the faots proved in the case a prima facie right (at least)
to the injunctions whioh they seek?
In ordinary cases it may
not be a difficult matter for the courts to determine whether

injunctions of this oharaoter should be granted, for the oourt
in ordinary oaBes will not investigate at length and fully all
the matters of law which may be involved. If it appears that the
plaintiffs have a real and serious case to argue and that they
have a prima facie right to some relief, then the court will not
investigate the matter further upon the motion. But in the
present instance we have heard long arguments upon these diffi­
cult questions, and I would like to express my appreciation to
the learned counsel in the case for the great assistance whioh
the court has received.
In those circumstances, I think that I
must now express my view upon the matters of law involved,
stating what I conceive the law to be, and then decide the
matter now before us on that basis of the law.
The result may perhaps be in some degree unsatisfactory,
because of necessity the facts have not been yet fully investi­
gated. In the course of his forceful reply, Mr. Beyfus supposed
that questions were put to a jury: Did this, that or the other
defendant do this, that or the other thing, or intend such and
such a result?
It is impossible at this stage to treat the
matters of fact in that way.
The questions of fact are raised upon affidavit
evidence. To the affidavits made on the plaintiffs' behalf,
sworn testimony by affidavit has been put in by the defendants,
to which in the nature of things, perhaps, it has not been
practicable to reply; and it is the fact that the plaintiffs
have made no reply.
In those circumstances, the court oannot,
as the learned judge pointed out, disregard the sworn assertions
of xhe defendants unless they are shown from other material in
the case clearly to be wrong. On the other hand, the court will
not, I conceive, decline to draw from the whole material before
it the natural and reasonable inferences which should be drawn.
It will plainly be necessary for me at a later stage to
examine olpsely the facts as they relate to each of the individual
defendants. For my immediate purposes, however, the narrative

may be stated thus.
It appears that since the year 1926, during which year
occurred the so-called general strike, the plaintiffs have
maintained the view that they would conduct their business upon
the basis that none of those they employed should belong in any
circumstances to any union. Thus, all their employees were
required to sign and, as I understand, did in fact sign an
undertaking in this form: "I undertake not to become a member
of any union as long as I am in your employment."
But during
recent years it seems that many of the plaintiffs' employees,
no doubt in disregard of this written undertaking, had become
members of a union known as the National Society of Operative
Printers and Assistants, commonly referred to a3 NATSOPA, of
which the fourth and fifth defendants are officers, the fourth
being its general secretary.
Early in the present year, the plaintiffs determined
the employment of one of their employees, one McKay, who had
been in their service for a great many years, but who had for
some time, as I gather, been a member of NATSOPA.
It is said on
the part of the defendants and others concerned in this matter
that the contract of employment was determined in fact for that
reason, namely, that he belonged to the union, and for that
reason alone. Mr. McKay accordingly sought help from NATSOPA.
His appeals were not in vain. NATSOPA, through its officers,
rallied strongly to his support. On 19th April they called out
upon strike those members of their union who were in the service
of the plaintiffs. It is said - and this is a matter to which I
must later refer - that the works of the plaintiffs at Glasgow
and Manchester were picketed by members of the union out on
strike.
Moreover, the officers of the union, NATSOPA, ^articu
larly Mr. Briginshaw, sent out cries and exhortations for
support from union labour all over the country.
As will appear,
he oalled for support in the way of outting off the supplies of

raw material to the plaintiffs, and he also called upon persons
capable of doing so to take steps to prevent the distribution of
the papers which the plaintiffs' business it is to publish and
distribute.
We are not in these proceedings concerned with the latter
question of distribution. We are conoerned with the supply of
the raw material, particularly paper and ink, to the plaintiffs
and to their premises which I have mentioned at Glasgow and
Manchester. It is specially in regard to Manchester that we have
to concentrate our attention.
The supplies of paper, so far as is relevant to thiB
case, came from one or more companies associated with the name
Bowater, I put it in that way, for it appears that there is more
than one limited liability company forming part of what has been
called the Bowater organisation.
That fact is, however,
immaterial, and for the purposes of this judgment I shall use
the name "Bowaters" as indicating the actual suppliers of the
paper to the plaintiffs and as also constituting the employers
of the loaders and drivers \?ho would in the ordinary course have
loaded the paper and driven it to the plaintiffs' premises.
On 22nd April, three days after the start of the strike,
there was a meeting in London of the Executive Council of another
body, known as the Printing and Kindred Trades Federation, that
being a body constituted by a number of trade unions, including
NATSOPA, and also another union, which has been called for short
in this case the Paperworkers Union, of which the full name is
the National Union of Printing, Bookbinding and Paper Workers.
Of that latter union the last defendant, Mr. Morrison, is the
general secretary. For present purposes, and adhering deliberat
ly to imprecise language, the Executive Council then (that is, o
the morning of 22nd April) resolved to support the dispute which
had arisen between NATSOPA and the plaintiffs.
The next matter of faot in this short but somewhat
turbulent history ooours on 25th April, which was a Friday. On

that day, according to the evidence — I again adhere for the
moment to imprecise terminology - it came to the attention of
the management of Bowaters that the drivers of Messrs. Bowatere
had expressed reluctance in regard to driving paper to the
plaintiffs' premises in Manchester.
Those drivers were member*
of a third union, the Transport and General Workers Union, of
which the first three defendants are officers.
In the ordinary course, the lorries would, as I under­
stand, have been loaded on the Friday and the Saturday and would
have set forth on Monday, the 28th April. But on the Monday it
also became known to the management that the loaders, who were
members of the Paperworkers Union had likewise expressed
unwillingness or reluctance to load the paper destined for the
plaintiffs.
The result of those intimations was that the management
came to the conclusion, no doubt in order to preserve the best
interests of Bowaters and so that they should not themselves be
involved in this matter or involved in it any more than they
could help, that they would not call upon any of their employees
either to load or to drive paper to the plaintiffs. The result
was that, from that date, 28th April, no further supplies of
paper have been taken from Bowaters to the plaintiffs.
On the evidence, as it appears, the failure to supply
paper involves, or has involved, a breach of contract which
continues. On 6th May Bowaters wrote to the plaintiffs a letter,
signed by their director, Mr. Fitt, in the following terms.
It refers to a letter they had reoeived, but which we have not
seen, and then continues: "We are prevented from performing our
contract by the action of the trade unions which has put a stop
to any of your paper being loaded at and delivered from Bowaters'
MerBey Paper Mills, Ellesmere Port. We anticipate that this
pressure will continue and may increase, and until withdrawn we
shall be unable to make deliveries under the contract."
Mr. Beyfus
1 case, for the plaintiffs, is that this

non-delivery, this breach or non-fulfilment of the contract
referred to in that letter which I have read between Bowaters
and the plaintiffs, has been knowingly and deliberately brought
about by the acts of the several defendants, and brought about 'oy
their persuading and inducing men in the service of Bowaters
and delonging to the respective unions concerned to refuse to
load or drive paper required for the plaintiffs.
xn the course of his opening Bpeech, Mr. Befyue
formulated his case, and it will I think be convenient to read
that formulation, to which throughout and without variation, Mr.
Beyfus has adhered.
He says that the acts complained of in this
case, namely, the acts of persuading and inducing to which I
have already referred, were acts done knowingly, that is, with
the deliberate aim and object of causing breaches of contract
for the supply of paper on the part of Bowaters to the
plaintiffs, as they in fact did, and therefore, notwithstanding
anything in the Trade Disputes Act, 1906, were wrongful.
On Jth May the writ in the action was issued. There are
to it six defendants. Mr. Deakin, Mr. Intin and Mr. Wood, the
first three, are officers of the Transport and General Workers
Union, to which the drivers concerned belonged.
The fourth and
fifth defendants, Messrs. Briginshaw and Moncrieff, are officers
of NATSOPA, directly concerned in the dispute between their union
and the plaintiffs. The laBt defendant, Mr. Morrison, is the
general secretary of the Paperworkers Union, to which the
loaders belonged.
The plaintiffs' claim is against all the defendants,
first, for an injunction "restraining the defendants and each of
them from doing (whether by themselves or by their servants,
agents or workmen or any of them or otherwise howsoever) any act
with a view to causing or procuring a breach or breaches by
Bowaters or any other company firm or person of any contract
between the plaintiffs and Bowaters or suoh other company firm
or person for the supply of newsprint or any other goods

whatsoever to the plaintiffs." There is then a further
injunction asked for, carrying the ambit of the first a little
further, but I do not pause to read it. Paragraph 3 of the
writ asks for damages "for conspiracy to procure the said breach
or breaches of contract"; paragraph 4 asks for damages "for
procuring a breach or breaches of contraot as aforesaid"; and
then there are two formal paragraphs.
I need hardly say, as the learned judge observed, that
we are not in this case concerned with the propriety upon
ethical or social grounds of anything that any of the parties to
the action have done. It is quite plain, I should imagine, that
the action which the plaintiffs have taken since 1926 is one
that is likely and must have been known by them to be likely to
cause the utmost anger and resentment amongst trade unionists.
Cn the other hand, it is said by Mr. Beyfus that it is a strong,
hf.rsL - nay, even tyrannical - thing if the great forces which
the trades unices have at their command can be mobilised to
intervene B O as t i starve or destroy the business of any form or
company which, may have taken any step of which the trade union
movement disapproves,
These a^e matters of social conduct, with which we are
not concerned. The question with which we are concerned is
whether there has been shown to be here such an unlawful act
upon the part of the defendants or any of them as entitles the
plaintiffs to relief.
At this stage, and having said so much, I will refer to
certain concessions which Mr. Beyfus has made and to which,
again, he has without variation adhered throughout the trial
before us.
The concessions are to be found at the top of page
9 of the judgment of Mr. Justice Upjohn: "For the purposes of
this motion the plaintiffs concede two things: firstly, that
there is in existence a trade dispute for the purposes of section
3 of the Trade Disputes Act, 1906;
secondly, that the conspiracy
alleged between the defendants is a conspiracy the predominant
8.

object of which is to secure the interest of the defendants and
not to injure the plaintiffs, &nd is not, therefore, actionable
per se". The learned judge thei\ refers to Sorrell v. Smith.
The learned judge's next sentenoe is as follows: "For
the purposes of this motion, therefore, the element of conspiracy
alleged to exist may be ignored." Of that sentence Mr. Beyfua
complains. With all deference to fthe learned judge, I think Mr.
Beyfus is entitled to make a complaint. The reference to a
conspiracy per se and to Sorrell v. Smith means, as I understand
it, that for the purposes of the motion Mr. Beyfus is not
relying on a conspiracy directed to injure the plaintiffs, which,
if done and because it is done in concert, might give rise to a
cause of action as formulated in the case mentioned. But that
leaves it open to him to allege, as he has alleged, that their
remains another conspiracy, namely, a conspiracy to achieve a
purpose otherwise unobjectionable by means which at any rate
include unlawful means, whether known by the. doers to be
unlawful or not.
The significance of Mr. Beyfus' adherence to that part
of his claim is this. If it is well founded and if he is able to
show that all the defendants were parties to the conspiracy,
then the actions of any one of them in furtherance of the objects
of their conspiracy will be treated as the actions of all of
them; so that, to make the matter more precise, Mr. Deakin, for
example, would be held responsible for what I have ventured to
describe - I do not do so in any offensive way - as the cries
and exhortations of Mr. Briginshaw.
It will be convenient if I say at once that, in my
judgment, for the purposes of this motion, Mr. Beyfus has not
established the existence of any such conspiracy.
Its existence
must rest, first, upon the transactions of the meeting of the
Executive Council of the Federation, to which I have alluded,
held on the 22nd April, at which were present Mr. Briginshaw and
Mr. Morrison, and divers other persons, but no others of the

defendants.
In my judgment, for the purposes of this motion it is
not shown that Mr. Morrison and Hr, Briginshaw at that meeting
agreed to take steps involving the procurement of breaches of
contract or other "unlawful" acts.
As to Mr. Oeakin and his colleagues, the second and
third defendants, the matter of the conspiracy is plainly far
more difficult in any event for Mr. Beyfus. He must say,
assuming the conspiracy had its origin on the 22nd April, that
Mr. Deakin, Mr. Wood and Mr. Intin knew sufficiently of the
resolutions passed, that is, of the agreement then made, that
when each of them took such part as he did in the later narrative
he must have associated himself with the conspiracy and thence­
forth became a conspiractor.
In my judgment, the evidence falls far short of enabling
the court to hold that any of these three defendants (even if
there was a conspiracy between Mr. Briginshaw and Mr. Morrison)
became a party to it.
In much that I am saying now I am conscious that I am
anticipating what must follow. I have referred to procuration
of breaches of contract.
It seems to me that the only other way
in which Mr. Beyfus might substantiate this part of the case is
in a sense by begging the question we have mainly to decide,
namely, whether the steps taken by any of these defendants were
unlawful in themselves, and then by going on to establish that
those steps which were unlawful were steps contemplated when the
original concert was made or when other conspirators
adhered
to it.
My subsequent analysis of the facts will, I hope, more
clearly elucidate what I have so far stated by way of general
anticipation. As I have said, in my judgment there is no suoh
material before the court as would entitle a court to hold that
there was here a conspiracy of the kind alleged for the purposes
of this motion between any of the defendants to the action.

It will, I think, be convenient now for me to go
immediately to the principal matters of law with whioh we are
concerned and to ask, and attempt an answer to, the question
whether, apart for the moment from anything in the Trade Disputes
Act, 1906,
there has been any wrongful act by any defendant
according to the common law.
The formulation of the case on which Mr. Beyfus has
based himself is founded upon the language of L 0rd Macnaghten in
the well known case of Quinn v. Leathern, to the effect that any
violation of legal rights, including rights under contract,
committed knowingly and without justification, is a tortious act.
In raising the matter in the way in which it has been
raised in this case, (so far as the very considerable and, I am
quite ready to assume, exhaustive researches of counsel have
gone), the plaintiffs have put forward an argument never formerly
put or decided by the courts, at any rate in this form.
In one
case, known as the Crofters oase, in 1942, the question appears
to have been raised when the case was proceeding to the House of
Lords. Mr. Gardiner produced for us the Appellants' Case in the
House of Lords, from which it appears that the present point in
all essentials was put as part of the Appellants' Case. Mr.
Beyfus also found for us the Respondents' Case, from which it
appears that the answer there suggested was that there was no
evidence whatever that the Appellants hau any knowledge of the
existence of any contract or acted knowingly with the intention
of breaking any contract which existed. Whether in the light of
that answer or for other reasons, the Appellants, so far as the
report of the case in the House of Loras goes, do not appear to
have proceeded with or pressed that point at all.
It will be convenient, I think, if I make at this stage
some reference to the Crofters case. It was a case which con­
cerned the manufacture of cloth in the Island of Lev/is. The
charge made against the officials and members of the Transport
and General Workers Union was to this effect: that in the
1 1 .

interests of one body of manufacturers in the Island, whose yarn
was spun in the Island, they instructed and prooured their
members to refuse to handle yarn made outside the Island and
imported into the Island, at a less price than the Island's
spinners charged, for other mills in the Island.
It is, however,
A
d e a r that, though an embargo (I use the word used in the case)
to that effect was imposed, it involved no breach of contract on
the part of the dookers concerned.
It is stated in terms in the
headnote that the dookers without any breach of contract acted^
in accordance with those instructions.
B
I have mentioned that the point now raised found its
place in the Appellants' Case, and there is one sentence in the
then Lord Chancellor's speech (Lord Simon's speech) which seems
to reflect its existence: "In the present case, the evidenoe did
not support an allegation that the defendants, or either of
"
them, had procured a breach of contract, and, if one of them,
aotlng alone, had without employing unlawful means induced the
dockers to refuse to handle the appellants' goods, I cannot see
that any action would have lain against him."
(Page 444,
1942
Appeal Cases).
3
I think, however, that Mr. Beyfus is entitled to say
that that sentence is not to be regarded as a concluded and
deliberate rejection of the argument which has been the main
burden of his case before us.
I have made reference to the formulation of the tort,
I
which Mr, Beyfus alleges, by Lord Macnaghten: "a violation of a
legal right committed knowingly and without justification is a
tort". On the face of it that is a broad statement which might
appear to cover a case suoh as the present, and cover it whether
or not the employees of Bowaters were induced to commit or did
F
commit any breach of their contracts of service with Bowaters.
The question on this part of the case then is: What is the
extent of this tort, commonly known as the tort of procuring
breaches of contract?
Is Lord Maonaghten'B formulation to be
12.

given it8 prima facie wide effect or must it be treated as
subjeot to some and, if so, what limitations?
Now it is not, I think, in doubt that there is a well
established principle of our law, established long before
Quinn v. Leathern, that, if a man, acting lawfully and in all
respects within his rights, causes as a result of what he does
loss to another, that other has no remedy, though the loss he
suffers is the necessary and inevitable consequence of the acts
of the first person.
It
s also a general, proposition of our law, as I
understand it, that it makes no difference to the matter as I
have stated it that the doer, the first person I have mentioned,
in his action was actuated by malice O T spite against the person
who suffered damage, or, as a general proposition, that his acts
were done with the intention of producing that result, that is
to say, aimed at the person who suffered the loss.
But like all general propositions, if they are stated
bereft of any context, they require the caution of some
reservation or qualification.
I do not, for example, forget
that there are some actions in tort of which malice may be the
gist of the case. It occurs, for example, in the law relating
to defamation and in regard to malicious prosecution. But I
need not dilate upon that aspect of the matter, because it is
agreed upon all hands that malice in the sense of spite or ill
will directed by any defendant against the plaintiffs plays no
part in this case and is an entirely irrelevant consideration.
As regards the question of intention, the aim and the
purpose of the act complained of, the matter is, however,
otherwise.
The general proposition which I have stated is
undoubtedly now subject (whatever may be the qualification to be
put upon it) to the existence of the tort which I have described
and which is commonly described as the tort of procuring
breaches of contract; and in that tort it is conceded that

the aot'or east have acted with the intention of doing damage
to the person damaged and that he must have succeeded in his
efforts.
Historically, as I follow it, this tort arose from
cases of master and servant, and may have been connected there­
fore rather with matters of status than of contract. But sinoe
the xvell known case of Lumley v, Gye and the subsequent affirma­
tion in Qulnn v. Leathern and thereafter of the majority decision
in Lumley v. Gye. it is also plain that this tort of procuring
breaches of contract is not confined to contracts between
master and servant. Lumley v. Gye was itself a case in which
the contraot breached was a contract for services rather than
of service, under which an operatic singer had engaged
hersolf to sing for the plaintiff.
In the case of South Wales Miners Federation v.
Glamorgan Goal Company (1903, P, King's Bench, afterwards
affirmed by the House of Lords),to which I shall hereafter
refer as the Glamorgan case, a case in this court upon which
Mr. Beyfus greatly relies, the contracts broken were contracts
of service between the employees of coal mining concerns and
the concerns themselves.
In that case the alleged wrongdoers had directly
intervened personally between the contracting parties. They
had themselves induced and procured a number of individuals,
being parties to the contracts of service, to break their
bargains with the other parties to the contra^s, their
employers.
It was suggested in the course of argument, I think
by Mp f Lindner and at first by Sir Frank Soskice, that the tort
must still be properly confined to such direct intervention,
that is, to cases where the intervener or persuader uses by
personal intervention persuasion on the mind of one of the
parties to the contract so as to procure that party to break it.
I am unable to agree that any such limitation is

logical, rational or part of our law. In yuch cases where the
intervener (if I may call him such) does so directly act upon
the mind of a party to the contract as to oause him to break
it, the result is, for practical purposes, as though in
substance he, the intervener, is breaking the contract,
although he is not a party to it. Such a statement of the
matter I take from Pollock's Law of Torts, 14th edition, at
page 266, where reference is made to Street's Foundations of
Legal Liability. At any rate, it is quite clear that, when
there is such a,direct intervention by the intervener, the
intervention itself is thereby wrongful.
But, as I have indicated, I cwinot think that the
result is any different if the intervener, instead of so
acting upon the mind of the contracting party himself, by some
other aot, tortious in itself, prevents the contracting party
from performing the bargain. A simple case is where the inter­
vener, for example, physically detains the contracting party so
that the contracting party is rendered unable by the detention
to perform the contract. The cases, as I shall presently show,
contain several instances where the intervener has employed
such means, being means wrongful in themselves.
An example is to be found in a recent case which came
before Mr. Justice Roxburgh, British Motor Trade Association v.
Salvador! and Others (1949, 1, Chancery), where there was a
criminal oonspiracy involved and the party procuring the
breach acted in pursuance of such a conspiracy.
But the matter then proceeds to the next stage. So
far I have considered only the case in which the intervener
directly acta himself, either by persuasion or by some wrongful
act of his own. What is the situation if he attains the same
result, indirectly, by bringing his persuasion or procuration to
bear upon some third party, commonly a servant of the contract­
ing party, but possibly an independent third person?
In my
judgment, it is reasonably plain (and the result, as it seems
15.

to me, would otherwise be highly illogical and irrational)
that, if the act which the third party is persuaded to do is
itself an unlawful act or a wrongful act (including in that
phrase a breach of contract) and the other elements are present
(namely, knowledge and intention to do the damage which is in
fact suffered), then the result is the same and the intervener
or procurer will be liable for the loss or damage which the
injured party sustains.
The cases which have been referred to include some
instances of that nature. A strong case was that ;f G.W.K.
Company and Another v. Dunlop Rubber Company. Ltd. (42 Times
Law Reports, page 376 and page 593)» where the act performed in
itself constituted a trespass quoad the goods of one plaintiff,
though not of the goods of the second plaintiff.
A recent instance of the application of the same
principle is to be found in the last case which was cited in
reply by Mr. Beyfus, a case in the Privy Council, Jasper son v.
Dominion Tobacco Company (1923 Appeal Gases, page 709),
where
the substance of the matter was that the appellant, Jasperson,
induced an agent of the name of Deacon, who had to the
appellant's knowledge only a limited authority to buy tobacco
for the defendants, to act in breach of his agency agreement
with the respondents and to engage himself to buy tobaoco far
in excess of the limit which had been imposed upon him.
Another instance — I do not prtend to cover the whole
ground — is National Phonograph Company, Ltd. v. Edison Bell
Consolidated Phonograph Company. Ltd. (1908, 1, Chancery, page
335), where fraud was practised by certain persons upon the
factors, so as to cause those factors to break their agreements
with their principals.
In all theBe cases which I have mentioned there was a
wrongful act committed —
I use that term to cover breach of
oontraot — by the party direotly induced, either a servant or
an agent, as the case may be, and oommonly, but not I think

necessarily, an independent wrongful act by the party inducing,
that is, an act itself wrongful apart from the tort for which
he was sued.
But I have come to the conclusion that the result is
otherwise where the persons induoed, being third parties,
servants or otherwise, are induced to do acts which are in
themselves lawful and involve no breach of oontracts on their
part with the contracting party.

1 think that if the matter is
examined, any other view involves so serious an inroad upon the
principles of the law that I cannot persuade myself that, from
BO casual a beginning as would otherwise be the case, that has
now to be taken as established as the law.
In the course of Mr. Beyfus
1 reply, I put to him e*n
instance to which I venture to return. It may be useful, since,
at any rate, it is quite free from any complication such as may
arise from industrial relationships.
My instance was of a contract between A and B, whereby
A had contracted to sell his house to B at a price beneficial
to A. * will assume that it had been disclosed by A to B that
there was in fact a public right of way passing close to the
property, but that B had been informed, correctly, that the use
of such right of way had become so slender that it was of
little, if any practical significance. Then let it be supposed
that some third party, desiring to cause B to resile from the
oontract with A and to lose for A the benefit of the contract,
persuaded a number of individuals in the neighbourhood to resume
the use of the right, of way, so that there then passed near the
premises a considerable stream of persons, all legitimately
using the right of way as such, as a result of which B decided
that the amenities of the permises were so damaged that he was
no longer willing to continue.
I find it for myself exceedingly difficult to suppose
that, the exercise of the right of way by the persons persuaded
being lawful, the intervener would be liable according to the
17.

principles of the law for having persuaded them to do that
lawful thing. The persons using it might or might not them­
selves have been innocent of any desire to cause damage to A;
they might be innocent of any knowledge of the existence of a
contract between A and B. If they were so innocent, they
themselves would, in my view, clearly not be under any
liability.
But if they knew of the existence of a oontract and
intended to cause its breach, another question might arise (and
this is a matter to which I shall have later to return) whether
they would in any circumstances be themselves liable.
Another instance may be quoted which was taken by my
brother Jenkins earlier in the case. Let it be supposed that
A had made a contract to supply certain goods to B and that the
intervener, knowing of the contract and intending to deprive B
of its benefit, had proceeded to go into the market and buy up
all the goods that he could find of that character, so as to
render it impossible for A in fact to perform the contract.
Again, * think it is impossible to say, according to the
principles of our law, that the intervener in such a case was
acting tortiously.
I have referred to cases where the intervener procured
or persuaded a servant.
The difficulty of carrying the matter
so far may be to some extent illustrated by considering what
would be the position of the servant if he were persuaded to do
something within the terms of his contract but (to his knowledge)
directed to procuring a breach of his master's contraot.
For
in such oase a claim might be said to arise not only against
the intervener but also against the servant. As was pointed out
by Mr. Gardiner, so long as the servant acted within the scope
of his authority, the master would be responsible for the act of
the servant; in other words, the servant's acts would be the
master's acts, and the curious situation would then result that
the master would be inducing a breach of his own contraot.
Quite plainly, he could not be sued both for breach of contract
38.

and also for inducing his own breach - in the latter event the
damages being at large. So much, I think, emerged from the
case of Said v. Butt (1920, 3, King's Bench, page 497), which
was approved by this court in the case of Soammell & Nephew v.
Hurley (1929, 1, King's Bench, page 419).
I adopt for this purpose the statement that I find in
Winfield's Law of Torts, 3rd edition, at page 577.
Dealing with
this tort of interfering with contracts, the learned author says*
"If ray servant,acting bona fide within the scope of his
authority, procures or causes me to break a contract that I have
made with you, you cannot sue the servant for interference with
the contract; for he is my alter ego, and I cannot be sued for
induding myself to break a contract."
Such is the inference
from Said v. Butt, which he then discusses. Later he says: "If
the servant does not act bona fide. presumably he iB liable, on
the ground that he has ceased to be his employer's alter ego",
and so on.
The difficulty (and I think it is a real difficulty)
is avoided if the act which the servant is procured to do is
not an act in accordance with or under his contract,but is in
breach ox violation of it.
I come then to such formulation of the result as seems
to me to be correct; but I should first add this. The argument
that this tort should be confined to such direct intervention
or interference as is illustrated, for example, in Lumley v,
Oye introduces this strange difficulty. A limited liability
oorapany, a persona ficta. can only act.through agents or
servants. If the intervention has to be of so direct a kind,
it would obviously create strange problems in the case of a
limited liability company. No doubt, if I approach some person
in the company who has authority on the company's behalf to make
contraots, I may be said to be approaching the company direct.
But I think that the illustration of the company emphasises the
anomaly whioh would result if in the case of a limited oompany

a tortious aot were only committed if the person approached or
induced-had a particular office or responsibility (actual or
perhaps ostensible) in the company.
But dealing, first, with individual contractors, it
seems to me that the intervener, assuming in all cases that he
knows of the contract end acts with the aim and object of
procuring its breach to the damage of B, one of the contracting
parties, will be liable not only (l) if he directly intervenes
by persuading A to break it> but also (2) if he intervenes by
the commission of some act wrongful in itself so as to prevent
A from in faot performing his contract; and also (3) if he
persuades a third party, for example, a servant of A, to do an
act in itself wrongful or not legitimate (as committing a breach
of a contract of service with A) so as to render, as was
intended, impossible A
1 s performance of his contract with B.
In the case of a company, the approach to or the
persuasion of a managing director, or of some person having
like authority, may be regarded as being in all respeots
equivalent to the direct approach of the individual contractor,
as found in Lumley v, Gye and in the Glamorgan case; but, if
the approach is made to other servants of the company, the case #
in ray view, becomes parallel to an approach made not to the
contracting party himself, but to some servant of the contracting
party, so that the intervener will only be liable if the act
which he procures the servant to do is either a breach of
contract towards the servant's master or is otherwise tortious
in itself.
I have stated the matter broadly and (using the
language of Lord Dunedin) as though the slate were clean, or at
any rate very nearly clean; but I must now make some reference
to the numerous cases to which we have been very properly
referred during the long and interesting argument.
I have already made mention of Lord Simon's speech in
the Crofters case. For a short statement of the principles
20.

involved in all that I have tried to explain I would respect­
fully like to read and adopt what is said by Lord Simon at
page 44?
(1942 Appeal Oases): "First, then, apart from the
effects of combination, it is clear that: (l) if A is damaged
by the action of B, A nevertheless has no remedy against B, if
B's act is lawful in itself and is carried out without employ­
ing unlawful means. In such a case A has to endure damnum
absque injuria.
(2) It makes no difference to the above propo­
sition that B in so acting has the purpose of damaging A. A
bad motive does not per se turn an individual's otherwise
lawful act into an unlawful one.
(3) If 0 has an existing
contract with A and B is aware of it, and if B persuades or
induces 0 to break the contract with resulting damage to A,
this is, generally speaking, a tortious act for which B will be
liable to A for the injury he has done him." The phrase
"generally speaking" alludes to what follows, namely, the
possibility of justification.
That is a short statement in very general terms. As
Mr. Beyfus points out, without further explanation and exposi
tion it may be fairly said not to be completely exhaustive.
But
it is, I venture to think, a correct statement of our law and
his first two propositions cover the general law as it stands
and stood before the impact of the tort of procuring a breach
of contract, a tort originating in its present form in Lumley
v. Gye.
It would be impossible in a case of this sort to pass
the matter over without some reference to the case of Allen v.
Flood (1898 Appeal Gases, page 1 ) .
It is, indeed, useful to
refer to what Lord Maonaghten said in that case at page 151:
"I do not think there is any foundation in good sense or in
authority for the proposition that a person who suffers loss by
reason of another doing or not doing some act at his own will
and pleasure, whatever his real motive may be, has a remedy
against a third person who, by persuasion or some other means
21

not in itself unlawful, has brought about the act of omission
from which the loss comes, even though it could be proved that
such person was actuated by malice towardB the plaintiff, and
that his oonduot if it could be inquired into was without
justification or excuse. The case may be different where the
act itself to which the loss is traceable involves some breach
of contract or some breach of duty, and amounts to an interfer
ence with legal rights.
There the immediate agent is liable,
and it may well be that the person in the background who pulls
the strings is liable too, though it is not necessary in the
present case to express any opinion on that point."
M r . Beyfus said that in the last words that I have read
Lord Macnaghten was perhaps prophetic of his later utterance in
Quinn v. Leathern. For the present I only pause to observe that,
where, as is contemplated, some servant by a tortious or other
wrongful act procures his master to break his contract, Lord
Macnaghten is indicating that, given the knowledge and intention,
that servant may be liable, and further suggesting that the
person behind the scenes, the person who pulls the strings, the
intervener, may be liable also. But the passage I have read
seems to me to be consistent with, and only consistent with,
such a general formulation of the law as I have attempted
already to state.
In the case of Ware & de Freville v. Motor Trade Asso­
ciation (1921, 3, King's Bench, page 40, at page 84 and following),
Lord Justice Atkin, as he then was, dealt at some length with the
incidence and the significance of intention, motive and so on.
That passage, to which Mr. Gardiner alluded, may also usefully
be considered in this connection, but, having referred to it, I
shall not take uptime by reading it.
There is a short passage in Sorrell v. Smith
(1925
Appeal Cases, page 700), a case to which I have already made
some reference, which may be usefully noted. At pages 723 and
724 of that case I find that Lord Dunedin, after having expressed

entire approval of Lord Justice Atkin's judgment in Ware & de
Freville. says: "My Lords, it may seem self-confident to be
positive when BO many learned persons have expressed other
views, but oandidly I never held a clearer opinion than the one
I now express, that the effect of Allen v. Flood and Quinn v.
Leathern is to settle beyond dispute that in an action against
an individual for injury he has caused to the plaintiff by his
aotion, the whole question is whether the act complained of was
legal, and motive or intent is immaterial; but that in an
action against a set of persons in combination, a conspiracy to
injure, followed by actual injury, will give a good cause for
action, and motive or intent when the act itself is not illegal
is of the essence of the conspiracy."
Again, I think it may fairly be said that that state
ment is much compressed, but I venture to think that it pays due
respect to the well established principles of law,against the
background of which the statements in Quinn v. Leathern must be
viewed.
I come now to consider those statements.
I read first
a short passage, to which I have already briefly alluded, from
Lord Macnaghten
1s speech on page 510 of the report in
1901
Appeal Cases. After referring to Lumley v. Gye. he says:
"Speaking for myself, I have no hesitation in saying that I
think the decision was right, not on the ground of malicious
intention - that was not, I think, the gist of the action - but
on the ground that a violation of legal right committed knowing­
ly is a cause of action, and that it is a violation of legal
right to interfere with contractual relations recognised by law
if there be no sufficient justification for the interference."
A similar commendation of the decision in Lumley v. Gye
is to be found in Lord Lindley's speech at page 535: "If the
above reasoning is correct, Lumley v. Gye was rightly decided,
as I am of opinion it clearly was. Further, the principle
involved in it cannot be confined to inducements to break
23.

contracts of service, nor indeed to inducements to break any
contraots. The principle which underlies the decision reaches
all wrongful acts done intentionally to damage a particular
individual and actually damaging him.»
Those, as I have said, are wide statements. But I
think, for reasons which I have attempted to give, that it
would be wrong and contrary to the intention of Lord Macnaghten
and Lord Lindley to expand them to an- extent greater than I
have defined.
I think that neither of those very learned Lords
could have intended so startling an inroad into what other
noble Lords in other cases treat as axiomatic in our law; nor
do I think that any of the succeeding cases did more than
apply the law so formulated, but also limited as I have
already indicated, in the cases which they had to decide.
Certainly no case has been found which extended the principle
which I have stated beyond the limits which I have attempted
to give it. Lord Macnaghten used, after all, the strong word
"violation", a word, I should have thought, necessarily carry­
ing with it the idea of something more than mere influence by
act8 otherwise in themselves lawful. And Lord Lindley speaks,
not of acts, but of wrongful acts done intentionally to damage
a particular individual and actually damaging him.
If that be the law, I must now come to the facts and
see what the conclusion must be. I have already indicated — I
hope to make out what I have said as I proceed — that there
is, in my opinion, no sufficient case made out for a conspiracy
of the kind for present purposes in question.
I must, therefore,
deal with each of the defendants in turn. But it is convenient
and proper to deal with then to this extent together, that as
to Mr. Deakin, Mr. Intin <and Mr. Wood, the officers of the
Transport and General Warkers Union, the drivers' union, who
were represented by Mr. Gardiner, the evidence in regard to
them oan be taken together.
The firBt affidavit to rchich I allude is that of the

transport manager of Bowaters, Mr. Botterill. He takes up the
tale when on the afternoon of Friday, .85th April, he received
a telephone call from Mr. Oassidy, who was the Northern Trans­
port Supervisor, reporting what had passed between Mr. Cassidy
and Mr. Wood. To that I shall allude later.
Mr. Botterill then spoke to Mr. Intin by telephone.
Mr. Intin was the Regional Secretary of this union.
Acoording
to Mr. Botterill, this is what occurred: "I told Mr. Intin that
Mr. Oassidy had informed me that the defendant John Wood . . .
had telephoned to him (Mr. Cassidy) from Transport House,
Salford, stating that members of his union" — that is the
Transport Workers Union — "had been instructed by the
defendant Arthur Deakin, who is the General Secretary of the
Transport and General Workers Union, not to handle or move any
paper for delivery to the plaintiffs at Manchester or Glasgow.
Mr. Intin confirmed that the said instructions had been given
through the Lancashire Regional Office at Salford to members of
his union employed at the said Mill and added that there would
probably be interference with the vehicles and drivers from
elsewhere if Bowaters persisted in carrying paper to Manchester
for the plaintiffs. "
So much for Mr. Botterill.
Then Mr. Cassidy, recording his conversation with Mr.
Wood, says this: "I was in my office at about 5

o
n Friday,
25th April, when I received a telephone call from the defendant,
Mr. John Wood. . . . He opened the conversation by saying that
he had some rather unpleasant news for me, aB he had written to
the shop steward of the Transport Department at Merseyside,
informing him that a dispute existed between NATSOPA and the
plaintiffs. He said that on the instructions of the defendant
Arthur Deakin, the General Secretary of the Transport & General
Workers Union, all branches of the Transport & General Workers
Union had been circularised to assist NATSOPA in the matter, and
I cjould therefore expect an indication from the shop steward that
25.

labour would be withdrawn as far as deliveries to Salford were
concerned. " He then suggested the telephone call that Mr,
Cassidy had with his superior, Mr. Botterill.
Mr. Cassidy later asya: "At about 5«30" on the same
afternoon Mr. Lloyd "returned from a normal delivery to
Manchester and informed me that he understood there was some
trouble at" the plaintiffs' Manchester offices. "He had
already been in oontact with Mr. Wood by telephone and had had
the fact of this trouble confirmed, and also informed me that
he was being officially informed by letter that our driving
staff were not to deliver goods to the plaintiffs."
If the matter stood there without more, it would seem
to me that there was evidence upon which a court might, should
and probably would act and infer that instructions had emanated
from Mr. Deakin, through the other defendants, to the effect
that the men employed by Bowaters were not to load, notwith­
standing any orders to the contrary given to them.
The next item of evidence to which I refer consists of
two documents. The first is a letter that Mr. Wood wrote to
Mr. Botterill on the same day, the 25th, in accordance with his
promise, and the second a letter he had written to Mr. Lloyd,
a copy of which he enclosed with his letter to Mr. Botterill.
In the letter to Mr. Botterill, Mr. Wood said: "As
you are provably aware, both the Paper Workers, NATSOPA and the
National Union of Railwaymen are refusing to carry any goods
for the above firm", that is, the plaintiffs. "We have been
approached by the other unions for assistance in this matter,
and whilst we are not concerned with the strike in its real
sense, I think you will appreciate our position if our people
are to deliver paper to Thomsons at this stage, which may
involve other transport workers taking action even against your
own workpeople. Today we have sent a lettejc to our Branch
Secretary at Ellesmere Port Depot, which is self-explanatory",
and he enclosed a copy of that letter.
26.

labour would be withdrawn as far as deliveries to Salford were
concerned." He then suggested the telephone call that Mr.
Cassidy had with his superior, Mr. Botterill.
Mr. Cassidy later asya: "At about 5«3°" on the same
afternoon Mr. Lloyd "returned from a normal delivery to
Manchester and informed me that he understood there was some
trouble at" the plaintiffs' Manchester offices. "He had
already been in contact with Mr. Wood by telephone and had had
the fact of this trouble confirmed, and also informed me that
he was being officially informed by letter that our driving
etaff were not to deliver goods to the plaintiffs."
If the matter stood there without more, it would seen
to me that there was evidence upon which a court might, should
and probably would act and infer that, instructions had emanated
from Mr. Deakin, through the other defendants, to the effect
that the men employed by Bowaters were not to load, notwith­
standing any orders to the contrary given to them.
The next item of evidence to which I refer consists of
two documents. The first is a letter that Mr. Wood wrote to
Mr. Botterill on the same day, the 25th, in accordance with his
promise, and the second a letter he had written to Mr. Lloyd,
a copy of which he enclosed with his letter to wr. Botterill.
In the letter to Mr. Botterill, Mr. Wood said: "As
you are provably aware, both the Paper Workers, NATSOPA and the
National Union of Railwaymen are refusing to carry any goods
for the above firm", that is, the plaintiffs.
"We have been
approached by the other unions for assistance in this matter,
and whilst we are not concerned with the strike in its real
sense, I think you will appreciate our position if our people
are to deliver paper to Thomsons at this stage, which may
involve other transport workers taking action even against your
own workpeople. Today we have sent a letter" to our Branch
Secretary at Ellesmere Port Depot, which is self-explanatory",
and he enclosed a copy of that letter.
26.

The letter from Mr. Wood to Mr. Lloyd is as follows:
"I wish to inform you that there is a dispute in being at the
moment between" the plaintiffs "and the Printers' Union and
they have informed me that our members employed by your firm
are oarrying paper to this concern.
Brother Deakin has asked
us to do all we can to assist the Printers' Union in their
right against D. C. Thomson and his anti-trade union attitude.
I shall be pleased, therefore, if you xzan take the appropriate
action and it would be advisable if you could speak to me by
telephone at your earliest possible convenience."
A3 we shall see, the appropriate action which was
taken (although it was taken not as a result of the letter,
but as a result of Mr. Wood telephoning the contents of his
letter, which did not in fact reach Mr. Lloyd till later) was
to call a meeting of a committee of the drivers, and the
resolution which was passed at that meeting is also in evidence.
I think it is clear that, notwithstanding the word
"therefore" in Mr, Wood's second letter, the two letters on the
face of them go much less far than the reported statements to
which Mr. Botterill and Mr. Cassidy have sworn in their
affidavits as to the nature of the instructions given. The
intimation of Mr. Wood to Mr. Botterill of what was going to
happen and the instructions (if that is the proper word for
them) given by Mr. Wood to Mr, Lloyd are at any rate consistent
with the steps being taken being only of such a character as
were in accordance with the performance of any contract by the
drivers with their employers, Bowaters.
In that state of the evidence I come to the affidavits
of the defendant themselves. I will not read the whole of Mr.
Deakin's affidavit, but in paragraph 3 he says this: "On or
about the 23rd April, 1952, as a result of information received
from the Printing and Kindred Trades Federation" and others,
"it appeared that a dispute had broken out between" NATSOPA
"and its members on the one side and the plaintiffs on the
27.

other, as to whether or not the plaintiffs' employees should
be employed subject to a condition that they should not belong
to any trade union. The various trade unions and bodies
conoerned in or connected with the said dispute invited the
assistance of the Transport and General Workers Union in the
said dispute and, acting on behalf of the Executive Council of
the Transport and General Workers Union and in accordance with
the general policy of the union, I asked our officials con­
cerned to give the employees' aide to the said dispute such
assistance as they properly could, but gave no instructions
that our members were not to handle or move papers for delivery
to the plaintiffs.
I did give instructions that our members
were not to carry out in connection with the said dispute any
work which members of other unions had refused to do."
Next there is the joint affidavit of Mr. Intin and Mr.
Wood. They say: "Neither of us has given any instructions to
any such drivers not to lead or handle goods consigned to the
plaintiffs.»
Then Mr. Intin says that he confirms what Mr. Deakin
has sworn to. In the next paragraph Mr. Wood says that the
shop steward referred to in Mr. Cassidy
1s affidavit is Mr.
Lloyd. He then says: "By 'the appropriate action
1" — that
being the phrase to which I have referred in Mr. Wood's letter
to Mr. Lloyd —
"I meant and the said Lloyd would have known
that I meant that our members were not to work in conjunction
with men who might be called in to do work which members of
other unions had refused to do" - that is, they were not to work
with persons commonly known as "blaaklegs"
In the next paragraph he says that he telephoned to
Mr. Cassidy and told him that he had unpleasant news. So far
the two stories are in line. He says that he told Mr. Cassidy
"that there was a difficulty of which he would no doubt be fully
aware over Messrs. D. C. Thomson's works in Salford, and that
owing to the fact that these works were being picketed by two
?8.

other organisations, namely, NATSOPA and the Paper Workers
Union, it would he unwise in my view to send any more paper into
those works. I asked him to oonsider this point, and said that
no doubt he would be informing his chief in London. It was and
is my opinion that if lorries driven by our members had been
loaded with supplies for the plaintiffs our members would not,
whatever instructions they had received from the union, have
delivered such supplies, when they found that the plaintiffs'
works were picketed.
I am quite sure that had they done so the
dispute would have spread because loaders at other newspaper
premises in the Manchester area would have refused to unload
paper from lorries driven by men who had delivered to the
plaintiffs.
While I told Mr. Cassidy that he could expect to
hear from Mr. Lloyd, I did not tell him nor was it the case
that he could expect labour to be withdrawn.
I told him the
contents of my said letter to Mr. Lloyd.
Shortly after this
conversation
T. Lioyd telephoned to me and * told him the
substance of my conversation with Mr. Cassidy."
Mr. Intin says much to the same effect: "I told him" —
that is Mr. Botterill —
"that we intended to support NATSOPA
where we properly could but that we did not want Bowaters to be
involved.
I did not tell him and it was not the case that the
defendant Deakin had given instructions . . . that members of my
union at Bowaters Mersey Mill were not to handle or move any
paper for delivery to the plaintiffs at Manchester or Glasgow. »
Then he states the advice he gave to Mr. Botterill.
Mr. Lloyd himself then made an affidavit, supporting
what the other deponents had said. He also states that nobody
gave instructions to the men not to load, but he exhibits a
memorandum or a minute of the meeting which was held of the
committee of the drivers on the 26th April, the Saturday, at
11.30 in the morning, which states: "It was decided that in
view of what is happening it would be unwise to handle D.C.
Thomson's newsprint and the shop steward was told to tell Mr.
29.

Oassidy to that effect."
In matters of this sort it is common knov7ledge that
one party to a conversation may place a slightly different
construction on the words used than the other. Reading all
the evidence and having regard to the solemnly sworn statements
of each of the three first-named defendants, that they never
gave any instructions of the kind indioated, I am quite unable
for this purpose to hold to the oontrary.
I think indeed there is this to be said, though I am
not for a moment suggesting any departure in the least degree
by Mr. Botterill or Mr. Oassidy from what they understood they
were told, that such written material as there is seems to be
in line with and to support the sworn testimony of the three
defendants.
I add that there appears in the evidence that I have
read to be nothing whatever, so far as I can see, to suggest
that any of these defendants had the smallest knowledge of any
conspiracy of the kind alleged. The most that emerges is that
Mr. Deakin Baid that he knew there had been a meeting on 22nd
April and that the unions there concerned were supporting the
strike.
The result, therefore, as regards the first three
defendants, is that the evidence in this motion, in my
judgment, falls far short of establishing against any of them
any such action as, according to the law as I have stated it,
would constitute the tort of wrongfully procuring the breach
in question.
It also follows, in my judgment, that, if the case
made against the first three defendants falls short of what is
required to satisfy the grant of an injunction, the effect of
which would or might operate on the drivers of Bowaters, the
oase for an injunction against the other defendants and
particularly against the last defendant (which might affect
those who load the lorries that the members of the Transport
30.

and General Workers Union have to drive) is, on practical
grounds, made obviously more difficult.
But I go next to Mr. Briginshaw. With the exception
of a matter relating to printing ink, which I will deal with
separately, if I am right in saying that no conspiracy has
been established, I can deal very briefly with Mr. Briginshaw.
Mr. Briginshaw, in the material he has placed before
the oourt, has been indeed forthcoming in the extreme. He has
made it quite plain that he is intensely angered by the atti­
tude taken by the plaintiffs.
I think nobody can read his
affidavit or the various exhibits to it, the press statements
that he issued and the circulars he issued, without feeling
that he was as a man standing on the housetops calling in
every direction for any and every support he could get from
anybody, whatever the nature of that support might be.
The matter of his utteranoes is dealt with by Mr.
Justice Upjohn in his judgment and I can, I think, properly
make one or two very brief references to the extracts which
will be found in that judgment.
Shortly after the 21st April,
in a circular "W.H.T.2. ", Mr. Briginshaw states: "We therefore
appeal to our colleagues for their active support to the
fullest extent with a view to stopping the handling of
Thomson's supplies and the purchasing of his publications so
far as possible."
Then later is a press statement, referring to the
Transport and General Workers Union "stopping transport of
paper for Thomsons from the docks this afternoon". And on the
30th April there ie a document addressed to General Secretaries
of all National Unions in which he refers to the circumstance
that the plaintiff oompany "has thumbed its nose at the whole
trade union movement since 1926, and bluntly we have decided
to take them on. . . . Wherever your organisation can give
direct assistance we shall be pleased if they will do so."
Then on 9th May (though that is after the issue of the
31.

writ it
is olearly legitimate to refer to it so far as it
reflects on what appearB before) he says that certain action
whioh he did not approve of would have released Thomsons from
••the iron grip in which we at present hold" them.
Finally, there is a reference to a speech he made, no
doubt with the fire of battle in his eye: "Railwaymen, trans­
port workers, miners, paper workers, printers, all are
absolutely united in their effort to see that this prevention
of the rights of the individual is ended. They are stopping
supplies, namely, they are stopping paper, and where he gets
papers out, we are stopping them being delivered,"
I need not proceed further. But it is quite plain,
and Mr. Beyfus has eo conceded, that the exhortations of Mr.
Briginshaw would not of themselves have operated to cause
members of the Paper Workers Union or the Transport and General
Workers Union to act in breach of their respective contracts of
service without the intervention of the respective officers of
their own unions. So far as Mr. Briginshaw was calling out for
assistance from every hand where it might be available, it seems
to me that he was doing nothing more than he was entitled to do
as a trade union leader.
There is, however, a further letter, which comes late
into the picture, namely, at some time after the issue of the
proceedings, which relates to printers ink. It is contained in
an exhibit to an affidavit of Mr. Leslie, the general manager
of Thomsons, being a letter from Messrs. Usher-Walker, Ltd.,
who are ink suppliers, to Mr. Leslie. After a certain narra­
tive, they say: "Our employees, members of NATSOPA, decline to
oomplete packing, labelling and delivery of the May consignment,
and this attitude has been persisted in by them for some three
weeks or more. Every effort has been made by us, by meetings,
©to., to induce a resumption of 'normal working
1, even so
recently as yesterday afternoon, when I personally interviewed
representatives of the employees ooncerned, I have to add
70

without Buooese, the decision having "been conveyed to me this
morning." Then he says that he thinks that that refusal was
by no means unanimous. Finally he says* "No position such as
this has ever before occurred in the history of this company",
and he expresses his regret.
The employees concerned are members of NATSOPA, the
union directly involved in the dispute. But there is in this
evidence, so far as it goes, nothing which seems to me to show
that the action of the employees of Usher-Walker, Ltd., involved
any breach of contract on their part or that, if so, it was
procured by any direct intervention by Mr. Briginshaw.
The inference which seems to be drawn from this
letter is that these employees were acting on their own. The
manager of the company made efforts, by meetings and so on, to
get them to change their minds and failed. On the whole,
therefore, I think there is nothing in that particular matter
to alter the view I have expressed in regard to Mr. Briginshaw.
And what I have said about Mr. Briginshaw applies
equally to Mr. Moncrieff.
33.

I cone, thirdly, to the last defendant, Mr. Morrison.
In this court certain further evidence has been
available and it is convenient to start with that evidence,
since it relates to the meeting on the 22nd AprKL, to which I
have already referred, but in regard to which, so far, there
is in fact no more evidence than of a most vague and general
character; but during the course of the cross-examination of
Mr. Morrison at the hearing on an Inquiry the question was
put:
"And what was the effect of the resolution?", the
resolution passed at the meeting.
"(A). We all agreed to do
what wo were called upon to do.
(Q) To do what you could to
stop supplies? (A). Oh, yes."
The next piece of evidence to refer to from the
plaintiffs' side is that of Mr. Merchant, who is Secretary to
the Employers Federation of Paper Makers and Board Makers
(Northern Section). He said:
"On Monday, 28th April, at
approximately twelve noon I received a telephone call from Mr.
Luko, the General Manager of Bowaters • • • . M r . Luke informed
ne that the loaders employed by the company who arc members of
the National Union of Printing Bookbinding and Paper Workers
had refused" — no date is specified —
"to load a British Road
Services' vehicle with newsprint paper for delivery to the
Glasgow offices of the plaintiffs. He asked ne to find out
from the area Organiser of the National Union of Printing
Bookbinding and Paper Workers what were the official instructions
of the Union in the natter.
"I eventually contacted Miss A. Whowell, the Area
Organiser of the National Union of Printing Bookbinding and
Paper Workers • • • and told her what Mr. Luke had said to no.
Hiss Whewell told ne that she had not received official
instructions fron the headquarters of her Union in London, and
that, accordingly, she would get in touch with then and lot no
know their decision. Later that afternoon she telephoned to ne
34.

to say that she had spoken to the Head Office of the National
Union of Printing Bookbinding and Paper Workers in London, and
that they had confirmed that the ncnbers of the Union wore in
agreement with the National Society of Operative Printers &
Assistants' members in their fight against the plaintiffs and
that, in particular, the members of the union who wore employed
as loaders by Bowaters Mersey Paper Mills, Ltd., would support
the National Socioty of Operative Printers & Assistants.
"I did not comment upon Miss Whewell's statement, and
she said that instructions would be Issued to all her nenbors."
Then Mr. Buckley made an affidavit, in which he said
that on the 12th May he had spoken on the telephone to Mr. Fitt,
a Dircdcrof Bowaters.
"Mr. Fitt further informed ne and I
vorily believe that the instructions to the said loaders were
given by tho defendant Norrlson." That is, I need hardly say,
a very general statenent, and Mr. Fitt does not state nor does
the deponent state where that lnfornation cane fron.
Thero is a further affidavit by Mr. Derek Thomson,
exhibiting a printed circular which bears the signature of
Mr. Morrison, dated in May, 1952, but which, it 13 conceded,
went out after the issue of the writ, nanely, the 8th May. The
relevant words in it are these:
"Our people employed by
Lon/don and also provincial wholesale distributors v/ill not
handle any of Thonson's publications until the dispute has been
settled."
The statenent, as I have said, so far as it relates
to distributors, is not a natter with which we are concerned
directly.
"Our colleagues enployed in papernills making paper
for Thonsons have responded magnificently."
Except for the statenent in cross-exaninatlon, it is
plain that there is, as regards Mr. Morrison, really little or
nothing to Indicate that he had given any instructions at all.
What he said in his affidavit was this: "Neither on or
before 28th April, 1952, had I issued or authorised or
35

aoquiesced in the issue of any instructions to or for trans­
mission to any loaders employed by Bowaters. • . . Nor have
I sinoe 28th April, 1952, issued or authorised or acquiesced in
the issue of any Instruction to or for transmission to the said
loaders.
N
Again, he says that on the 14th May he spoke to Mr.
Carlisle, his own Branch Chairman.
"He then informed.ne and I
verily believe that on 14th May, 1952, he lnforned Mr. Luke,
the Manager of Bowaters Mersey Paper Mills, Ltd., that I had
Issued no instructions to or for the said loaders and that the
refusal of the said loaders to load newsprint for delivery to
the plaintiffs was in no way connected with anything done or
said by ne."
Mr. Carlisle, in another affidavit, supports that
statement.
I nust say that when that affidavit of Mr. Morrison
was read I confessed to sone feeling of surprise at the
cxtrenely unqualified character of Mr. Morrison's disclainer.
The unfortunate Miss Whewell seems to ne left sonewhat in the
air. Wo know now that Mr. Morrison had been at this necting
on tho 22nd April and had been a party to the resolution which
involved active support (though I an not saying by unlawful
noans) to NATSOPA. I repeat that it seens to ne sonewhat
surprising that he should so completely wash his hands of
the natter as to say that he never acquiesced in any issue
of any instructions, and I an inclined to think that sone of
the nenbers of his union night share ny surprise; but in
fact it appears that Mr. Morrison was abroad from the 27th April
to a date early in Nay and, as I think, though I have expressed
ny surprise, there is in truth nothing in the evidence before
u 3 to indicate that he, Mr. Morrison, did give any particular
Instructions and, in particular, nothing to suggest that he gave
any instructions to the effect that contracts were to be broken.
36.

As regards the circular and the reference to "Our
colleagues have responded nagnifIcently", that is explained by
a further affidavit, in which Mr. Morrison says that what ho
"had in nind was the fact that I had learned that membera of"
his union "employed at Donside Mills, Aberdeenshire" —
nothing
at all to do with the plaintiffs —
"had given notice to
terminate thoir engagement. This notice had boon given by those
workers in the belief that they were being called on to make
and to load newsprint for the plaintiff company.
1.
That, I
think, must be taken as.sufficient explanation, and the mistake
was apparently remedied.
There is, finally, a further affidavit by Mr. Linforth,
which exhibits a memorandum of Mr. Luke referring to the
conversation on the 12th May, in which Mr. Luke says:
"During
the telephone conversation he was told by Mr, Morrison that
the latter had not Issued any further instructions cancelling
those given before and the embargo on the handling of D. C.
Thomson newsprint" remained as before.
As regard that, the explanation is that what Mr.
Morrison said was that he had given no instructions and there­
fore he had no comments to make.
Again, no doubt, there is, as I think, an instance of
the common experience that what was said nay not have been
understood exactly in the sense in which the statement was
made.
I repeat that it seems to me that on that evidence
there is really no material upon which a court aould or should
in this notion infer that Mr. Morrison had given any
particular instructions, and certainly none that he had given
instructions to bring about a breach of contract.
As to the whole of the defendants, it follows accordingly
from what I have said that, in ny Judgnent, there is not on
this notion proved any procuring of any wrongful act by any
37.

member of an? of the unloi.3 concerned.
I need only add tb^,t, 30 far as I folio:? it, there
was in fact on the evidence no breach of contract by any
workmen, since Bowaters, for reason which I doubt not «ere
prudent, took the line, as already appears, that they rrould not
order any nan either to load or to drive paper for the
plaintiffs. They accepted the situation as they found it and,
again I doubt not prudently, made no attempt to contrive to get
the paper to the plaintiffs by any other means. It is true, if
ny analyeis is correct, that there was in the case of the first
three defendants what might be called a direct approach to
Bowaters, but, GO far as I understand the evidence, I cannot
see that that direct approach amounted to anything'more than a
statenent of the facts as the nenbers of the union understood
then to be.
In particular there was a reference to picketing,
which was obviously of great significance; and, whether that
reference was correct or incorrect, there is no suggestion
that it was not nade in the bona fide belief of its truth.
I appreciate that in these natters there is a difficult
question of distinguishing between what might be called
persuasion and what might be called advice, meaning by the
latter a mere statement of, or drawing of the attention.of
the party addressed to, the state of facts as they were. In
the. case of Foroey. before Mr. Justice Simonds (as ho then was),
it was held that the advice given was of such a nature, was of
a character obviously intended to be acted upon, that it was
for all practical purposes equivalent to persuasion\ but,
if the natter be advice merely (in the ordinary sense of that
7 /ord), it seens to ne that there can be no conplair.t about it;
nor do I think that Mr. Beyfus con derive any substantial
dssistanoo by saying that Bowaters proved thensolvcs merely
ohlcken-hearted and that tho ease with which a person nay be
persuaded is not a relevant consideration in detcrnlning
38.

whether the persuader was wrongful in what he was doing. That
nay, as a general proposition be true; but in this case it seens
to ne, as I have already more than onoe indicated, that the
evidence on this notion, whatever nay energe when the natter
is fully investigated, falls too far short of any proof of
what is required, as I think, to constitute a cause of action
such as would entitled the plaintiffs to an injunction. Put
another way, I cannot see that the evidence establishes that
thore was anything done by Bowaters vis-a-vis the plaintiffs
which is fairly attributable to any such pressure, persuasion
or procuration on the part of any of these defendants as would
in any event cause then to be liable in tort.
The whole natter is, indeed, when it is exonined at
large, of a very vague character. The links in the chain which
connect the defendants with the plaintiffs ore, at points
at any rate, as I think, very unsubstantial. I have referred
already to the absence of proof of direct procurement or
attempted procurenent of wrongful acts on the part of the
worknen. There were in fact, so far as I can see, no wrongful
acts at all on the worknen's part. There is, noreover, no
evidence that there was actual knowledge, on the port of any
of the persons charged, of the contract or of any contract
between Bowaters and the plaintiffs, assuming such contract to
have been broken; or at least, if these persons thought that
there night be or was sone contract, any knov/ledgc of the terns
of that contract.
If all else were satisfactorily proved, it night \7ell be
(having regard to connon knowledge about the way business is
oonduoted) that absence of such strict proof would not * iffice
to prevent the grant of relief; but, when the whole natter is
generally regarded, it seens to ne that the case is a very
different case fron anything that was contemplated by Lord
Macnaghten in Quinn v. Leathen and approved in subsequent cases
39.

in which Quinn v* Leathern has been applied.
I find it, therefore, not unnatural that the learned
judge thought that the chain of causation, at sone point at any
rate, had been broken. I only venture to differ fron hln in
so far as he rested his conclusion on the proposition that
it was insufficient for the purposes of the plaintiffs
1 clain
to show that the alleged breach of contract by Bowaters was
indirectly procured through breaches of contract by the
worknen; since, as I think, if it were shown that the worknen
were induced or procured to break their contract vis-a-vis
Bowaters, prina facie, if the intent and knowledge were shown,
that would suffice for present purposes.
Having reached that conclusion, it is unnecessary for
ne to express concluded opinions upon the natters raised in
regard to the Trade Disputes A ct, 1906, particularly upon the
point of great difficulty which energes in reference to section
3 of that Act. The section is well known, but I shall be
forgiven for reading it. It provides:
"An act done by a
person in contenplation or furtherance of a trade dispute shall
not be actionable on tho ground only that it induces sone
other person to break a contraot of enploynent or that it is an
interference with the trade, business, or enploynent of sone
other person, or v/ith the right of sone other person to dispose
of his capital or his labour as he wills."
Having read tho section, it is pertinent to observe
that it would not, as I follow it, having regard to Mr. Beyfus
1
concession, be a wrongful or actionable act on the port of
these defendants vis-a-vis Bowaters to cause worknen belonging
to their respective unions to break their contracts of
enploynent; but, if that be so, it does not in -the least follow,
nor is it in ay Judgment the case, that, if the v/q>rknen did
break their contracts, they, the workmen, did not d.a an
unlawful act, in the sense of connittlng a breach of contraot.
40.

I should, therefore he prepared to hold that the defendants
would not be entitled to resist the plaintiffs' clain merely
by saing that their own procuration of the workmen's breach of
contract was vis-a-vis Bowaters protected by section 3.
But I would like to make clear that I an not to be taken,
in fornulatlng the case as I have, to be deciding that, if the
worknen broke their contracts with Bowaters, they would
thenselves be liable to the plaintiffs for the damage which the
plaintiffs suffered. Of course, as a prenlse to any such clain
knowledge and Intent of the worknen would have to be proved;
but, even so, since the worknen could lawfully have given notice,
which presumably would be of a very short character, it nay
well be that the danage could not be said to flow from the fact
that they had ceased loading immediately instead of after
giving the requisite notice. Further, it seems to ne difficult
to suggest as against any one individual workman that his
particular act could have resulted in the damage which the
plaintiffs suffered. Whether any case for conspiracy would lie
against all of them is, of course, another natter, and we are
not in any way concerned with it.
There renalns, however, the nore substantial point that
the defendants were in any case protected by the second linb
of section 3, "or that it is an interference with the trade,
business, or enploynent of sone other person". It is clear
that that limb, if available, could be used, not only as
excusing the acts thenselves, but also as a justification for
the acts done, if otherwise not excusable. I confess that the
words "an interference with the trade, business, or enploynent
of sone other person", being so v/ide in scope, would ai)pear at
first sight to cover such a natter as that with which v;e are
now concerned; but there are, I think, and as Mr. Beyfus has
suggested, foroible arguments to the contrary.
It is right, in ny Judgnent, as Mr. Beyfus asked us to do,
41.

to construe this section by having due regard to the state of
the law at tho tine the section was enacted. The Judgment of
Lord Justice Homer in the case of Glblan v. National
Amalgamated Labourers Union of Great Britain and Ireland, in
1903, is, I think, some indication that at that date the
extent to which a person might be liable merely for interfering
in some way with the trade or business of other persons was in
doubt: (see also the speech of Lord Loreburn in the case of
Conway v..Wade, reported in 1909 Appeal Oases, page 506, at
page 510)• Moreover, it would be a curious way to enact the
natter if so wide a significance was to be given to the second
limb, for in that event the words "of employment" in the first
limb seem to be otiose - unless it was intended by the first
limb to deal with the specific matter most in the minds of the
legislature and then to use in the seoond part of this
section general words which might or.night not also cover
the subject natter of the first limb.
Such opinions as have been expressed.on the neaning of.
the seoond limb would appear to support Mr, Beyfus
1 argument*
Twice the natter cane before Mr, Justice Russell and in the
later of those cases, Brlnelow v, Qasson (1924, 1« Chancery,
page 302), at page 314 Mr. Justice Russell expressed the view
that the argument for which Mr, Beyfus contends was, to use
the learned judge's language, "a good point" - a view which
had also, though no reasons were stated, been taken in the
Irish case of Riordan v. Butler (1940 Irish Reports, page 347).
Finally, in the notes to this section, at pages 521 and
522 in volune 32 of Halsbury, which was.written by Lord
Justice Slesser, the sane view is taken.
In the circumstances and in particular having regard
to the fact that this natter nay be argued by the defendants
on the question of Justification, I think it desirable that I
should, express no view of ny own upon this natter, except to
42".

say that, If the plaintiffs proved thenselves otherwise entitled
I should nyself be inolined to think that the reference to
section 3 of the Trade Disputes A c t , 1906, would not suffice
to prevent the granting of an injunction on this notion*
Other points were taken on section 4 and seotion 5 of
the Trade Disputes Act, which I hope that I shall be excused
for dealing with sonewhat sunnarily. It was suggested that
there was protection to be derived fron section 4, since these
gentlenen sued were in truth officials of the union and section
4 was directed to prohibiting actions of tort against a union.
I do not think that that is any answer to the present case, if
otherwise good; nor do I find in the definition paragraph of
section 5 anything which would assist the defendants towards
their construction of section 3*.
Then the point was nade by Mr. Gardiner that in no
circumstances was it shown that there was any sufficient
knowledge of the contract or Intent that the contract was
broken, in the sense that it was entirely repudiated; that
the breach went to the root of the contract. Upon those
natters, likewise, I express no view - not the less because the
other party to the oontract, Bowaters, is not before the Court.
I only indicate, though expressing no concluded opinion, that,
notwithstanding the view expressed by Mr. Justice Porter (as he
then was) in De Jetley Marks v. Greenwood (1936, 1, All England
Reports, page 863), I an not at present satisfied that the
breach procured must be of a kind that goes to the root of
the cQntract. I on not clear upon what principle that view was
based.
These, however, are all natters which in the circum­
stances I think I can and should probably leave without saying
Qore about then. And I nust also not be token by any neons to
assent to the view that, if entire repudiation, a breach going to
the root of the contract, is required, that did not in the
43.

present ciroumstanoes ooour.
It is plain, finally, that it is unnecessary for ne
also to say anything in regard to the forn of injunction that
night be appropriate, if I had thought that any injunction were
appropriate upon this notion. The oircunstanco that it night
not in all the circumstances be wholly effective, no doubt is
sonething which the court will consider; but I on for fron
satisfied that that circumstance would, if the plaintiffs were
otherwise right, be a sufficient ground for persuading the
court to grant no renedy at all to the plaintiffs. I should,
however, like to noke it quite plain that I accept without
reservation the assurance given to this court by all the
defendants through their counsel that, if any injunction
were granted, it would be loyally inplenented by each of the
defendants to the best of his ability.
In the circumstances, which I have stated in a Judgment
the length of which I greatly regret, I cone to the conclusion
that this appeal fails and should be disnissed.
LORD JUSTICE JENKINS.
44.

LORD JUSTICE JENKINS: This is an appeal from an order of Mr.
Justice Upjohn, refusing the plaintiffs interlocutory relief
in an action brought by them against certain trade union
officials in respect of allegedly wrongful acts done by the
defendants in furtherance of what, for the purposes of the
motion to which the appeal relates, is admittedly a trade
dispute within the meaning of the Trade Disputes Act, 1906.
The occasion of the dispute seems to have been the
alleged summary dismissal by the plaintiffs from their employ­
ment of one McKay, a member of the National Society of Operative
Printers and Assistants (NATSOPA); but the substantial bone of
contention, if I may eo describe it, is the policy pursued by the
plaintiffs for many years of excluding trade union members
from their employment,
In furtherance of the dispute NATSOPA members in the
employ of the plaintiffs (for there appears to have been a con­
siderable number of such, notwithstanding the ban) were called
out on strike on, I think, the 19th April of this year, and
the acts complained of in the action are in the nature of
allegedly wrongful Interference with contractual relations
between the plaintiffs and other companies, designed to
deprive and in fact depriving the plaintiffs, who are printers
and publishers, of necessary supplies of paper and ink.
The parties to th^s unfortunate controversy are
entitled to advance their reapestlvesides of it by any lawful
means they think fit to adopt, and the sole question for the
court is whether the defendants or any and, if so, which of
them have, as alleged by the plaintiffs, overstepped the
bounds of lawful action in the promotion of their cause or,
perhaps I should say, the cause of NATSOPA.
Apart from the effect of the Trade Disputes Act,
1906, the principles of law to be applied in this case are
thus summarised by Lord Simon (Lord Chancellor) in Crofter
Harris Tweed Company v. Veltch (1942 Appeal Cases, page 435,
45.

at page 44
2):
"First, then, apart from the effects of com­
bination, it is clear that (1) if A is damaged by the action
of B, A nevertheless has no remedy against B, if B
Ts act is
lawful in Itself and is carried out without employing unlawful
means. In such a oase A has to endure damnum absque injuria.
(2) it makes no difference to the above proposition that B
in so acting had the purpose of damaging A. A bad motive does
not per se turn an individual's otherwise lawful act into
an unlawful one.
(3) If C has an existing contract with A and
B is aware of it, and if B persuades or induces C to break
the contract with resulting damage to A, this is, generally
speaking, a tortious act for which B will be liable to A for
the injury he has done him.
In some cases, however, B may
be able to justify his procuring of the breach of contract
M,
and the passage goes on to give an example of suoh justificat­
ion.
In view of Mr, Beyfus
1 disclaimer for the purposes
of the motion of any allegation of conspiracy to injure, the
reference to the effect of combination, developed later in the
same speech, requires no further notice here.
Lord Simon's first and second propositions found
earlier recognition in the speech of Lord Macnaghten in Allen
v, Flood (1898 Appeal Cases, page 1, at page 151), where he
said;

MI do not think that there is any foundation in good
sense or in authority for the proposition that a person who
suffers loes by reason of another doing or not doing some act
which that other is entitled to do or to abstain from doing
at his own will and pleasure, whatever his real motive may be,
has a remedy against a third person who, by persuasion or some
other means not in itself unlawful, has brought about the act
or omission from which the loss comes, even though it oould be
proved that such person wag actuated by malioe towards the
plaintiff, and that his conduct if it could be inquired into
was without Justification or excuse.
46.

uIhe case may be Indifferent where the act itself to
which the loss is traceable involves some breach of contract or
some breach of duty, and amounts to an interference with legal
rights. There the immediate agent is liable, and it may well
be that the person in the background who pulls the strings is
liable too, though it is not necessary in the present case to
express any opinion on that point."
See also the Judgment of Lord Justice Atkin (as he
then was) in Ware & de Frevllle v. Motor Trade Association
(1921, 3, King's Bench, page 40,

a"t page 84), where he said:
"Now in what respect does an intention to injure the plaintiff
affect the legal position stated above?
It appears to me to
be finally decided by the majority in the House of Lords in
Allen y. Flood that an act otherwise lawful is not made unlawful
by an intention to injure, except in the case of a combination
to injure. That decision is binding upon every tribunal in the
land; it certainly binds the Court of Appeal; and, though,
after it was given, divers Judicial personages more or less
respectfully kicked against the pricks, speeding humbly for
myself I unreservedly accept the reasoning of the majority judg­
ments. "
To the same effect is this passage from the speech of
Lord Dunedin in Sorrell v. Smith (1925 Appeal Cases, page 700,
at page 7
23):
"My Lords, it may seem 6elf confident to be
positive when so many learned persons have expressed other
views, but candidly I never held a clearer opinion than the
one I now express, that the effect of Allen v. Flood and Quinn
v« Leathern is to settle beyond dispute that in an action
against an individual for injury he has caused to the plaintiff
by his action, the whole question is whether the act complained
of was legal, and motive or intent is immaterial; but that in
an action against a set of persons in combination, a conspiracy
to injure, followed by actual injury, will give a good cause
for action, and motive or intent when the act itself is not
47.

illegal is of the eBsence of conspiracy.*
Lord Simon's third proposition refers to what may
be desoribed as the primary form of the type of wrong held to
be actionable in Lumley v. Gye (2 Ellis and Blackburn, page
2l6) and in that form commonly designated ^procuring or in­
ducing a breach of contract
11*
This type of wrong was more broadly defined by
Lord Macnaghten in Quinn v. Leathern (1901 Appeal Cases, page
495, at page 5^)» where he said: " Speaking for myself, I
have no hesitation in saying that I think the decision was
right, not on the ground of malicious intention — that was
not, I think, the gist of the action
but on the ground
that a violation of legal right committed knowingly is a
cause of action, and that it is a violation of legfl right
to interfere with contractual relations recognised by lawlf
there be no sufficient Justification for the interference,"
To this should be added Lord Lindley'6 statement of
the law in the same case at page 535:
"if the above reasoning
is correct. Lumley v. Gye was rightly decided, as I am of
opinion it clearly was. Further, the principle involved in it
cannot be confined to inducements to break contracts of servioo
nor indeed to inducements to break any contracts. The prlncipl
which underlies the decision reaches all wrongful acts done
intentionally to damage a particular individual and aotually
damaging him."
We were referred to a great many more authorities,
but no useful purpose will be served by multiplying citations,
as the passages I have quoted sufficiently indicate the general
principles of law to be applied.
After a full and elaborate, argument, I am satisfied,
first, that Lord Simon's third proposition does not exhaust­
ively define the type of actionable wrong to which it refers,
as there may, on the principles stated by Lords Macnaghten
48,

and Lindley in Quinn v. Leathern, be an actionable interference
with contractual rightB where other means of interference than
persuasion or procurement or inducement, in the sense of
influence of one kind or another, brought to bear on the mind of
the contract breaker to cause him to break his contract, are
used by the interferer; but, secondly, that (apart from
conspiracy to injure, which, as I have said, is not in question
sof&r as this notion is concerned) acts of a third party
lawful in themselves do not constitute an actionable interference
with contractual rights merely because they bring about a breach
of contract, even if they were done with the object and
intention of bringing about such breach.
With these two propositions in mind I turn to consider
what are the necessary ingredients of an actionable interference
with contractual rights.
The breach of contract complained of must be brought
about by some act of a third party ( whether alone or in
concert with the contract breaker), which is in iteself unlawful
but that act need not necessarily take the form of persuasion
or procurement cp inducement of the contract breaker, in the
sense above indicated.
Direct persuasion or procurement or inducement
applied by the third party to the contract breaker, with
knowledge of the contract and the intention of bringing about
its breach, is clearly to be regarded as a wrongful act in
itself,,and where this is shown a case of actionable inter­
ference in its primary form is made out: (Lumley v. Gye).
But the contract breaker mayhimself be a willing
party to the breach, without any persuasion by the third party,
and there seems to be no doubt that if a third party, with
knowledgeof a contract between the contract breaker and another,
has dealings with the contract breaker which the third party
knows to be Inconsistent with the c ontract, he has committed
49o

an actionable interference: (See, for example, British
Industrial Plastics. Ltd. v. Ferguson (1938. 4, All England
Reports, page 504), where the necessary knowledge was held
not to have been brought home to the third party; and British
Motor Trade Association v. Salvadorl (1949, Chancery, page
556)). The inconsistent dealing between the third party and the
contract breaker may, indeed, be commenced without knowledge by
the third party of the contract thus broken; but, if it is
continued after the third party has notice of the contract, m
actionable interference has been committed by him: (See, for
example, De Francesco v. Barnum (63 Times Law Reports, page
514, at page 515.)).
Again, so far from persuading or inducing or pro­
curing one of the parties to the contract to break it, the
third party may commit an actionable interference with the
contract, against the will of both and without the knowledge
of either, if, with knowledge of the contract, he does an act
which,.if done by one of the parties to it, would have been a
breach. Of this type of interference the case of G.W.K. L td.
v. Dunlop Rubber Company Ltd. (4
2 Times Law Reports, page 376)
affords a striking example.
Further, I apprehend that an actionable interference
would undoubtedly be committed if a third party, with knowledge
of a contract and intent to bring about its breach, placed
physical restraint upon one of the parties to the contract, so
as to prevent him from carrying it out.
It is to be observed that In all these cases there is
something amounting to a direct invasion by the third party
of the rights of one of the parties to the contract, by prevail­
ing upon the other party to do, or doing in concert with him,
or doing without reference to either party, that which is
inconsistent with the contract; or by preventing, by means of
actual physical restraint one of the parties from being where
50.

he should be or doing what he should do under the contraot.
But here the acts complained of as constituting the
actionable interference do not amount to a direct invasion of
the plaintiffs' contractual rights. The plaintiffs' case as
regards paper is that the defendants persuaded, induced or
procured employees of Bowaters (that is, drivers employed by
Bowaters Sales Company, Ltd., and loaders employed by Bowaters
Mersey Mills, Ltd.) to break their contracts of employment by.
refusing to drive lorries loaded with, or to load lorries with
paper destined for the plaintiffs, with the object and intention
of causing Bowaters Sales Company, Ltd., to break, or making
it impossible for them to fulfil, their contrpct for the supply
of paper to the plaintiffs; and that the defendants did In fact
by the means I have stated produce the intended result.
The plaintiffs' case as regards inks, so far as any
case at all can be gathered from the evidence, is mutatis
mutandis of a similar order.
I have stated the plaintiffs' case in the only form
in which (if made out on the facts) it can, in my view, be
maintainable in law apart from conspiracy to injure; for I reject
as inconsistent with the authorities referred to at the
beginning of this Judgment Mr, Beyfus' submission that it is
unnecessary for him in order to make out his case to show that
any acts wrongful in themselves were done by the defendants in
order to bring about the breach of Bowaters' contract with the
plaintiffs, provided they were done with the intention of
causing and did in fact cause such breach; and, so far as I
can see, the only acts wrongful in themselves which there is any
question of imputing to the defendants on the evidence must
oonsist in their having persuaded, induced or procured the
employees concerned to break their contracts of employment.
I have not overlooked Mr, Beyfus' submission that
there is evidence of direct persuasion or procurement or
51.

inducement of Bowaters Sales Company. Ltd. (in the persons of
Messrs. Botterill and Cassidy) to break the contract with the
plaintiffs, but I do not agree that this is so, and will
therefore deal with that part of Mr. Beyfus' argument when I
come to examine the evidence.
Now, the plaintiffs' case, as I have stated it, does
seem to me to involve an extension of the range of actionable
interference with contractual rights beyond any actual instance
of this type of wrong to be found in the decided cases. Here
there is no direct invasion of the plaintiffs' rights under the
contract.
It was no part of their contract that these partlcula;
employees, or any particular employees, should be employed by
Bowaters for the purpose of effecting deliveries of paper to
them. Thus the breaches by these men of their contracts of
service with Bowaters (if made out on the facts) did not in
themselves involve any breach of Bowaters' contr?ct with the
plaintiffs. The breaches of the contracts of service (if made
out) were, so to speak, at one remove from the breach of
contract complained of. Nevertheless, I think that in principle
an aotionable interference with contractual relations may be
committed by a third party who, with knowledge of a contract
between two other persons and with the intention of causing its
breach, or of preventing its performance, persuades, induces
or procures the servants of one of those parties, on whose
services he relies for the performance of his contract, to
break their contracts of employment with him, either by
l$sviBghlm without notice or by refusing to do what is necessary
for the performance of his contract, provided that the breach of
the contract between the two other persons intended to be
brought about by the third party does in fact ensue as a
necessary oonsequence of the third party's wrongful inter­
ference with the contracts of employment.
I take this view because I see no distinction in
principle for the present purpose between persuading a man to

break his contract with another, preventing him by physical
restraint from performing it, making his performance of it
impossible by taking away or damaging his tools or machinery,
and making his performance of it impossible by depriving him,
in breach of their contracts, of the services of his employees.
All these are wrongful acts, and, if done with knowledge of and
intention to bring about a breach of a c ontract to which the
person direotly wronged is a party, and if in fact producing
that result, I fail to see why they should not all alike fall
within the sphere of actionable interference with contractual
relations delimited by Lords Macnaghten and Lindley in Quinn
v» Leathern.
But, while admitting this form of actionable inter­
ference in principle, I would hold it strictly confined to
cases where it is olearly shown, first, that the person
charged with actionable Interference knew of the existence of
the contract and intended to procure its breach; secondly,
that the person so charged did definitely and unequivocally
persuade, induce or procure the employees concerned to break
their contracts of employment with the Intent I have mentioned;
thirdly, the/t the employees so persuaded, induced or procured
did in fact break their contracts of employment; and, fourthly,
that breach of the contract forming the alleged subject of
interference ensued as a necessary consequence of the breaches
by the employees concerned of their contracts of employment.
I should add that by the expression "necessary cons-
quenoe" used here and elsewhere in this judgment I mean that
it must be shown that, by reason of the withdrawal of the
services of the employees concerned, the contract breaker was
unable, as a matter of practical possibility, to perform his
contract; in other words, I think the continuance of the
services of the particular employees concerned must be so vital
to the performance of the contract alleged to have been inter­
fered with as to make the effect of their withdrawal comparable,

for practical purposes, to a direct invasion of the contractual
rights of the party aggrieved under the contract alleged to
have been interfered with, as for example ( in the case of a
contract for personal services) the physical restraint of the
person by whom such services are to be performed.
I make the above reservations in regard to the scope
of this newly propounded form of actionable interference with
contractual rights for these reasons. It is now well settled
that, apart from conspiracy to injure, no actionable wrong is
committed by a person who, by acts not in themselves unlawful
prevents another person from obtaining goods or services
necessary for the purposes of his business, or who induces
others so to prevent that person by any lawful means. It
follows, in my view, that ( again apart from conspiracy to
injure) there is nothing unlawful, under the law as enunciated
in Allen v. Flood and subsequent cases, in general appeals to
others to prevent a given person from obtaining goods or
services, for that is a purpose capable of being lawfully carried
out, and there can therefore be nothing unlawful in advocating
it, unless unlawful means are advocated.
The result of such
advocacy may well be that unlawful means are adopted by some to
achieve the purpose advocated, but that is not to say that a
person who advocates the object without advocating the means is
to be taken to have advocated recourse to unlawful means. If
by reference to the form of actionable interference with con­
tractual rights now propounded, general exhortations issued
in the course of a trade dispute, such as "stop supples to X",
"Refuse to handle X'sgoods", "Treat X as "black", and the
like, were regarded as amounting to actionable interference,
because persons reached by such exhortations might respond to
them by breaking their contracts of employment and thereby
causing breaches of contracts between their employers and other
persons, and because the person issulng such exhortations must
be taken constructively to have known that the employers,
54.

concerned must have contracts of some kind or other with other
persons, and that his exhortations (general as they wero) might
lead to breaches of those contracts through breaches of contrrcts
of employment committed by persons moved by his exhortations,
then the proposition must be accepted that it is an actionable
wrong to advocate objects which can be achieved by lawful means
because they can also be achieved by unlawful means; r.nd to
that proposition I decline to subscribe.
Furthermore, as the learned Judge in effect pointed
out in his Judgment, almost every strike, if to any extent
successful, must cause breaches of contracts between the employer
against whom it is directed and the persons with whom he is
doing business, the very object of the strike being to bring
his business to a standstill or himself to terms. Again, many
a strike embarked on in support of a strike in progress in some
other concern must have had for its immediate object .the cu:' M n g
off of supplies to, or prevention of distribution of the
products of, or the application of similar pressure upon, that
other concern.
Yet we have been referred to no case in which the
persons inciting a strike have been held liable for actionable
interference with contractual relations between the strikers'
employers and the persons with whom they deal*} and in principle
I do not think that the inciters of the strike could be held
so liable in the absence of proof that they knew of the
existence of a particular contract, and, with a view to bringing
about its breach, counselled action by employees in itself nece­
ssarily unlawful ( asfor example breach of their contracts of
employment) designed to achieve that end.
To hold otherwise would, in my view, be to admit not
only an addition to the means ^hereby actionable interference
with contractual rights may be compassed ( which addition, as I
have said, I am in principle prepared to accept), but also an
enlargement of the character and scope of the tort itself (which
5.

I cannot agree to).
Finally, not every breach of a contract of employment
with a trading or manufacturing concern by an employee engaged
in services required for the performance of a contract between
his employer and some other person carries with it as a necessary
consequence (in the sense above indicated) the breach of the
last mentioned contract. For instance, A induces B 5 C's lorry
driver, to refuse, in breach of his contract of employment, to
oarry goods which C is under contract to deliver to D, and
does so vith a view to causing the breach of C's contract with
D. C could, if he chose, engage some other lorry driver, or
arrange alternature means of transport, but does not do so, He
fails to deliver the goods, telling D he ?s prevented from
doing so by B'e breach of contract. In such circumstances
there has been no direct Invasion by A of C's rights under his
contract with D, and, although A has committed an actionable
wrong against C, designed to bring about the breach of C's
contract with D, and a breach has in fact occurred, it cannot
be said that the breach has in fact been caused by A's wrongful
act, and therefore D cannot, in my view establish as against A
an actionable interference with his rights under his contract
with C.
It remains briefly to relate the foregoing considera­
tions to the f acts of the present case.
The defendants Briginshaw and Honorieff are
respectively the General Secretary and Northern District
Secretary of NATSOPA, the union immediately concerned in the disr»
pits with the plaintiffs. I am content to accept the learned
Judge's description of the part they played in the matter. Their
concern was to put the maximum pressure on the plaintiffs in
furtherance of NATSOPA's side of the dispute, aid there is no
doubt that they did advocate as a means of pressure the cutting
off of the plaintiffs' supplies of paper and ink, and also *
(though this is not relied on for the purposes of the present
56.

motion) the prevention of the distribution of the plaintiff's
publications. But the evidence does not appear to me to bring
home to them anything more than general echortations of the type
to which I have already referred and which cannot, in my view,
be properly regarded as amounting to persuasion, inducement
or procurement of breaches of contracts of employment generally,
*
still less of breaches by any particular employees of Bowaters
or anyone else of their contracts of employment.
There is no
evidence that either of these defendants had knowledge of the
existence of Bowaters' contract with the plaintiffs, or that
they had in view the breach of that contract. As appears from *•
B
what I have said above, It is not, in my Judgment, enough- to
impute to them constructively knowledge that there must have been
contracts of some kind or other between the plaintiffs and their
suppliers of paper which or some of which might be broken In
the event of employees of such suppliers breaking their
C
contracts of service. Actual knowledge of the existence of a
particular contract, an intention to bring about the breach of
that contract, and unequivocal persuasion, inducement or
procurement of the employees concerned to break their contracts
of employment to the extent necessary to achieve that end, must,
J
in ny view, be shown; and, in my view, none of these things
is shown so far as the defendants Briginshaw and Moncrleff
are concerned. Moreover, Mr. Beyfus did not dispute that,
save as regards members of NATSOPA
4, the exhortations of these
j
two defendants must be regarded as directed to securing support
by other unions and inducing them to bring their members iflto
action, rather than as directed to individual members of other
unions with a view to seouring independent action by them
without instructions from the unions to which they respectively
F
belonged.
For these reasons, the case against the defendants
Briginshaw and Moncrleff is not, in my view, such as to
warrant interlocutory relief against them or either of them.

I will next consider the cases of the defendants
Deakin, Intin and Wood, who are respectively the General
Secretary, the Regional Secretary (Region No. 6 ) , and Trade
Group Secretary (in the same Region) of the Transport and
General Workers Union, the union to which the lorry drivers
employed by Bowaters Sales Company, Ltd., belong.
The evidence as regards these three defendants has
been reviewed by my Lord and I will not take time by reading
it over qtain. It is contained, on the plaintiffs' side, in
the affidavit of Mr, Cassidy, Bowaters Sales Company Ltd.'s
transport superviser at Ellesraere Port, and the affidavit of
Mr. Botterill, Bowaters Sales Company Ltd's transport manager,
and, on the defendants' side, the affidavit of the defendant
Deakin, the affidavit of the defendants Intin and Wood and
the affidavit of Mr. Lloyd, the stiop-steward at Bowaters in
charge of the drivers. In addition there are the two letters
of the 25th April, 1952. one written by the Defendant Wood.
to Mr. Botterill and the other by the defendant Wood to Mr.
Lloyd, the shop-steward (a copy of the latter having been
enclosed with the former); and there is also the exhibit to
Mr. Lloyd on the 26th April, with Mr. Cassidy's permission.
The evidence of Messrs. CasBidy and Botterill might,
if uncontradicted, conceivably suffice to make out a prima
facie case for interlooutory relief against these three
defendants; but it is not uncontradicted.
An entirely different
version of what took place is given by these three defendants
and for the purposes of the motion I think that their evidence,
which has not been replied to, must clearly be regarded as
displacing any prima facie case which the evidence on the
plaintiffs' side night otherwise have sufficed to establish,
particularly as the evidence of these three defendants is
supported by the letter and copy letter sent by the defendant
Wood to Mr. Botterill and Mr. Lloyd's minute of what took
place at the drivers' committee meeting,
58.

Mr, Beyfus suggested that on these defendants
1 own
evidence a case of pasuading Bowaters (in the persons of
Messrs. Botterill and Cassidy) to break the contract with the
plaintiffs was made out. I cannot agree. The defendant Wood
told Mr. Cassidy that in his (Wood's) opinion it would be
unwise to send any more paper to the plaintiffs' works. The
*
defendant Intin advised Mr. Botterill that he should not ask;
his men to load anything for Thomsons. Mr. Lloyd told Mr.
Cassidy of the terms of the committee meeting's resolution,
which was to the effect that, in view of what was happening
it would be unwise to handle the plaintiffs' newsprint, the shop
B
steward, Mr. Lloyd, being told to inform Mr. Cassidy to that
effect. Messrs. Botterill and Cassidy accepted the view of
the position taken by the defendants Intin and Wood and by the
men's committee, and did not thereafter attenpjr. to 6end any
further loads to the plaintiffs or give any further orders for
C
lorries to be loaded for or driven to the plaintiffs' works.
It was not, so far as I can see, a case of yielding to per­
suasion or pressure; it was acase of avoiding a course of
action which in circumstances by no means under the control
j
of Bowaters' drivers was likely to cause trouble if pursued,
and by no means necessarily trouble of the drivers' own making.
The defendants Intin and Wood and Mr. Lloyd cannot fairly be s aid
to have done any more than put the facts to Messrs. Botterill
and Cassidy. Messrs. Deakin, Intin, Wood and Lloyd were not,
j
far as I can see on the evidence as It at present stands,
concerned at all to bring about the breach ^f any contract
between Bowaters and the plaintiffs, nor is there any evidence
that they knew anything at all about any such contract.
Their main object seems to have been to keep their union in
F
general and Bowaters
1 drivers in particular out of trouble in
what wasplainly a difficult position for the latter, though
no doubt it was also their wish to give such support as they
properly could to NATSOPA in that union's dispute,
59,

Nor, as it seems to me, is it shown that the drivers
in fact broke their contracts. They drove no more loads to the
plaintiffs, but they were never asked to do so.
Further, it is not shown that the breaoh of BowaterB\
contract with the plaintiffs followed as a necessary con -
quence of the attitude of these particular drivers* Hon constat
that Bowaters could not have made other arrangements Cor
delivery, had they thought it expedient to do so. But I find
nothing in the evidence to suggest that they ever even attempted
anything of the kind. Their passive attitude may well have been
due to anxiety not to become embroiled in the dispute, but
that -s not to say that their breach of contract with the
plaintiffs was caused by any unlawful action on the part of
these three defendants.
Accordingly, I think that the motion was rightly
refused as against these three defendants also.
There remains the case of the defendant Morrison,
the Secretary of the National Union of Printing, Bookbinding
and Paperworks, the union to which Bowaters
1 loaders belong.
There is considerable force in Mr. Beyfus criticism of his
evidence, and when the case comes to trial he may have some
difficult questions to answer in cross-examination ; but on the
evidence as it stands I cannot find even prima facie proof that
he gave any instructions at all to Bowaters
1 loaders, still lese
any instructions to them amounting to persuading or procuring
or inducing them to break their contracts of employment.
As to the supplies of ink, the employees concerned
were NATSOPA members and as such under the aegis of the
defendant Briginshaw; but the evidence as it stands on this
part of the case to ray mind leaves too much to the imagination
to make it reasonably possible to infer that the defendant
Briginshaw persuaded, Induced or procured these employees to
break their contracts of employment.
60.

As regards Mr. Beyfus
1 allegation of a conspiracy
amongst the defendants to do the various acts complained of as
unlawful, I agree with my Lord that no such conspiracy Is made
out on the present evidence; and in any case I do not see how
thi6 allegation could assist the plaintiffs' claim for inter­
locutory relief, inasmuch as on the evidence as it now i/jnnds
it does not appear to me that any unlawful act Is brought hone
to any of the defendants individually or collectively.
Following my Lord's example, I do not propose to
express any view on the effect of the defence based on section
3 of the Trade Disputes Act, 1906, which for the present purpose
is, so far as I can see, the only point of substance arising
under that Act. This is obviously a question of difficulty,
which, having regard to the view I have formed of the position
at common law on the facts at present available, It is
unnecessary, for the purposes of the motion, to decide one way
or the other.
For the reasons I have endeavoured to state, I agree
that this appeal falls and should be dismissed*
61.
LORD JUSTICE MORRIS:

LORD JUSTICE MORRIS: The decision in Lumley v. Qye. which was
argued on demurrer, was that the principle governing an action
for enticing away servants could be applied if it were proved
that a defendant prooured the breach of a oontraot to give
professional services.
In disoussing the principle, Mr. Justice
Erie expressed the view (see page 232) that the procurement of
the violation of a right is a oause of action. In two of the
counts of the declaration the word "maliciously" was used and
in all three it was alleged that the defendant "enticed and
procured" Miss Wagner.
When in Quinn v. Leathern Lord Macnaghten considered
Lumley v. Gye he approved it, and did so not on the ground of
malioious intention, which he said was not the gist of the
aotion, but on the ground that a violation of legal right
committed knowingly is a cause of aotion. He said that it is
a violation of legal right to "interfere" with contractual
relations recognised by law if there is no sufficient
justification for the interference.
Lord Lindley also endorsed the decision in Lumley v. Gye
and expressed himself g,& follows at page 534:
"But a
person's liberty or right to deal with others is nugatory,
unless they are at liberty to deal with him if they choose to
do so.
Any interference with their liberty to deal with him
affects him.
If suoh interference is justifiable in point of
law, he has no redress.
Again, if suoh interference is wrong­
ful, the only person who can sue in respect of it is, as a
rule, the person immediately affected by it;
another who
suffers by it has usually no redress; the damage to him is too
remote, and it would be obviously practically impossible and
highly inconvenient to give legal redress to all who suffered
from such wrongs. But if the interference is wrongful and is
intended to damage a third person, and he is damaged in fact —
in other words, if he is wrongfully and intentionally struck at
through others, and is thereby damnified — the x?hole aspect of
6*.

the case is changed:
the wrong done to others reaches him, his
rights are infringed although indirectly, and damage to him
is not remote or unforeseen, but is the direct consequence of
what has been done".
Then there follows shortly afterwards the passage in
the speeoh of Lord Lindley to which my Lords have already
referred.
It is to be observed that Lord Lindley speaks of inter­
ference which is "wrongful" and of acts which are "wrongful".
In tune with the opinions to which I have referred is
the well established principle that an act which does not amount
to a legal injury oannot be actionable because it is done with
a bad intent. In his speech in Q.uinn v. Leathern Lord Macnaghten
expressed the view that the headnote bo Allen v. Flood might
well have run in those swords. In Allen v. Flood, at page
123,
Lord Herschell said:
"It is certainly a general rule of our
law that an act prima facie lawful is not unlawful and action­
able on aocount of the motive which dictated it. I put aside
the case of conspiracy, which is anomalous in more than one
respect".
Clear guidance in these matters is afforded by the
propositions formulated by Lord 8imon at page 442 in his speeoh
in the Crofters case.
It is conceded in the present case that there is in
existence a trade dispute. In so far as conspiracy is alleged,
it is expressly disclaimed that there is any conspiracy or
combination which has the injury of the plaintiffs as its real
purpose. The motive or purpose of the defendants is to secure
freedom for the employees of the plaintiffs to join a trade
union and to dissuade the plaintiffs from continuing a ban
on trade union membership, which the plaintiffs have for many
years enforced.
With the competing viewpoints in regard to the con­
troversy 7/hich is thus denoted this court is not and cannot be

in any way oonoerned.
Though no combination wilfully to injure
the plaintiffs is alleged, so as to be actionable on the basis
of Sorrell v. 8mith, it is alleged that the defendants combined
or conspired to oommit the tort described in the writ as
procuring a breach or breaches of oontract.
When considering this part of the oase it may be useful
to have in mind the words of Lord Lindley at page 252 of his
speech in the House of Lords in the oase of South Wales Hiners
Federation v. Glamorgan Goal Company, when he said in reference
to the law of conspiracy:
"But the possession of great power,
whether by one person or by many, is quite as consistent with
its lawful as with its unlawful employment;
and there is no
legal presumption that it will be or has been unlawfully
exercised in any particular case. Some illegal act must be
proved to be threatened and intended, or to have been committed,
before any court of justioe in the United Kingdom can properly
make such conduct the basis of any decision".
Much debate took place during the hearing in regard to
the nature and definition of the tort which the plaintiffs
allege was committed by the defendants.
The words used by Lord
Macnaghten when expressing his reasons for approving the
decision in Lumley v. Gye were adopted in this court by Lords
Justices Romer and Stirling in the Glamorgan Coal Company oase.
Various words and phrases have been used at different times.
Amongst them are the words "induce" and "procure". But the
principle which underlies the matter is laid down by Lord
Macnaghten and Lord Lindley.
The tort is committed if a person
without justification knowingly and intentionally interferes
with a contract between two other persons. There must therefore
be knowledge of the existence of contractual relations between
others and the intentional commission v/ithout justification of
some act which interferes with those contractual relations so
as to bring about or procure or induce a breach resulting in
damage. If A has a contract with B, the tort will be committed
64.

by X if there is a violation of the right B haa under his
contract by the intentional interference of X. If the contraot
between A and B is lawfully terminated, then there is no
violation.
In this context the notion of interference involves
something wrongful. The breach of contract must be brought
about or prooured or induced by some act which a man is not
entitled to do, which may take the form of direct persuasion
to break a contraot or the intentional bringing about of a
breach by indirect methods involving wrongdoing.
A dear
illustration is furnished if X with knowledge persuades A to
break his contract with B.
The tort would also be committed
if X with knowledge coerced A to break his contract.
Infinite
varieties of facts may occur calling for the application to
them, when they are precisely ascertained, of the principles
laid down.
Thus if X with knowledge and intention forced A to
break his contract with B by depriving A of his only possible
means of performing the contract (as for example by removing
the only available essential tools or by kidnapping a necessary
or irreplaceable servant or by persuading a necessary and
irreplaceable servant to break his contract) then probably in
such cases the liability of X could be proved.
In these
illustrations I leave out of account the effect of the Trade
Disputes Act,
1906.
Unless it is shown that some of the defendants
combined and agreed together to do acts which included the
commission of this tort, the enquiry resolves itself into
considering how the matter stands in regard to each defendant
separately.
In my judgment, that enquiry does so resolve.
Two of the defendants were present at the meeting which
took place on the 22nd April.
Those present all agreed to do
what they could to stop supplies for the plaintiffs and
agreed to take what they regarded as oommon trade union action.
I do not consider that the worst construction must be placed
upon these resolves, so that it must be assumed that the
65.

objectives were to be reached by unlawful means. The purposes
»,hich the defendants sought to achieve were purposes V7hich
could be achieved by the adoption of lawful means.
My Lords have dealt with the facts and I do not
propose to do more than to refer to certain aspects of them.
The defendant Deakin states that after hearing that
there had broken out a dispute between the National Society of
Operative Printers and Assistants and its members, on the one
side, and the plaintiffs, on the other, he asked the officials
of the Transport and General Workers Union to give the employees
side to the dispute such assistance as they properly could, but
he states that he gave no instructions that members were not to
handle or move papers for delivery to the plaintiffs
I cannot see that a case for interlocutory relief is
made out. It cannot be assumed that this defendant knew of
any contract between Bowaters Sales Company, Limited, and the
plaintiffs or that he intended to bring about its breach.
This
defendant made no approach to the Bowater Company and did not
ask anyone to make such an approach.
It cannot be assumed that
this defendant took steps to bring about a breach of the con­
tract between the plaintiffs and Bowaters.
As regards the defendant Wood, he states that he spoke
to Ccssidy and expressed the view that, as the plaintiffs
works in Salford were being picketed, it would be unwise to
send any more paper.
The opinion of this defendant was that,
whatever instructions the drivers received from their union,
they would not have delivered the supplies when they found that
the plaintiffs' works were picketed.
The defendant Intin states that he told Botterill that
they intended to support the National Society of Operative
Printers and Assistants where they properly could, but that they
did not want Bowaters to be involved, and he advised Botterill
not to ask the men to load anything for the plaintiffs.
In considering these matters it has to be remembered
66.

that, once the dispute had broken out relating to the plaintiffs
and onoe the plaintiffs premises were being picketed, there
was a situation which was not of the oreation of Deakin or
Wood or Intin, but was one with which Bowaters had to reckon.
If it be the case that the drivers would, apart from any advice
or instruction to them from their union, refuse to deliver to
picketed premises, then that also was a serious feature of the
situation.
Bowaters could have put the matter to the test by
ordering the drivers to drive, but they did not.
Bowaters
may have feared interference v/ith the vehicles and drivers from
elsewhere if they sought to deliver paper.
It does not seem to me that Wood or Intin would have
any knowledge of the contractual position between the pxsintiffe
and Bowaters, though they might guess or assume that a projected
delivery would be pursuant to some contract.
They would not
necessarily know nor perhaps would they pause to speculate
whether any projected future deliveries would be pursuant to
some already existing contract.
The evidence of Wood as to the letter that he wrote
to Lloyd cannot be disregarded, nor the evidence of Lloyd to
the effect that the committee of the branch met.
The decision
was that, in view of what was happening, it would be unwise to
handle the plaintiffs' newsprint.
In view of all these circumstances, I do not consider
that it would be fitting on the present material to proceed
on the basis that these defendants, Intin and Wood, had procured
Bowaters to break their contraot, either by way of some direct
approach to Bowaters or by way of any persuasion of the drivers
to break their contracts of employment.
In view of the conclusions which I have expressed, I do
not find it necessary to deal with the question whether, if
these defendants had induced the drivers to break their contracts
of employment, the effect of Section 3 of the Trade Disputes Act,
I9O6, would be to exclude such conduct from the category of
wrongful interference.
Si.

Mr. Gardiner took certain additional points. He sub­
mitted that it must be shown that there is not a mere breach
of contract, but a repudiation of it. He submitted that, if
the main elements of the tort were established, the defendants
could show that there was justification for their interference;
that before the tort can be oommitted the particular terms of
the contract must be known; that Bowaters did not in fact
break their contract with the plaintiffs.
I do not find it necessary for present purposes to
deal with these contentions. It may be that the evidence in
regard to the contractual position between the plaintiffs end
Bowaters is not yet in all respects complete and, save to such
extent as is unavoidable, it is undesirable in litigation to
which Bowaters are not parties and in which they have not
been heard to express views as to the contractual position.
I find it, further, unnecessary to express any opinion
in regard to Section 3 of the Trade Disputes Act,
1906.
In regard to the other defendants, I am not satisfied
that it is shown that with knowledge they brought about a
breach of contract by some action i7hich they were not entitled
to take.
As my Lords have fully analysed the evidence, I do not
feel that any useful purpose would be served by my referring
further to it. I have reached the same conclusions as my Lords
and I am in accord with the reasoning they have expressed in
their review of the facts.
GARDINER:
On behalf of the first three defendants, my Lords,
I ask that the appeal may be dismissed with costs. Mr. Justice
Upjohn ordered that the costs of the hearing before him be
costs in the action.
There v/as an application made at the
time when nobody knew what exactly everybody's evidence was
going to be; but this is an ordinary appeal from a decision
of c. learned judge, whose decision has been upheld, and I
submit that it should be with the usual consequences.
68.

MR. LINDNER: My Lords, on behalf of the defendants Bringinshaw
and Moncrieff I ask for the same order.
MR. TH0MP60N:
On behalf of the defendant Morrison, I adopt what
has been said and I ask, my Lords, for a similar order.
MR, BEYFUS: It is a question for your Lordships' discretion.
If
in the action it should ultimately be held, when all the matters
have been investigated, that my clients were right, it would
be a little hard, would it not, that the defendants should
receive the costs of this very necessary appeal on any aspect
of the case?
I ask your Lordships to make the costs costs in
the action, in which case I shall only get them in the event
of it turning out that I am right and that that which these
defendants have sworn is not true.
(Their Lordships conferred).
THE MASTER OF THE ROLLS: Do you want to add something, Mr. Gardinor?
MR. GARDINER:
I would add in reply to what Mr. Beyfus has said that,
if the plaintiffs succeod at the trial on the ground that the
evidence put before the court by the defendants was not fully
frank evidence, he will, quite rightly, get his costs before
Mr. Justice Upjohn; but the fact will still remain, in my
submission, that he ought not to get his costs of this appeal,
because it would simply mean that he has wrongly appealed from
a decision which on such materials as were before the learned
judge was a correct decision.
THE MASTER OF THE ROLLS: We are all of opinion that the fair thing
in this case would be that the defendants' costs of this appeal
should be their costs in the action.
If they win the action,
they get them; but, if you win, you will not get yours, Mr.
Beyfus.
MR. BEYFUS: I follow that precisely.
Having regard to the very great importance of this case,
not only to my clients, but its general importance, would your
Lordships give my clients leave to appeal, so that they may
consider whether to appeal or not?
69.

THE MASTER OF THE ROLLS: Have you anything to say upon that,
Mr. Gardiner.
MR. GARDINER:
No, my Lord;
I feel that I could not properly say
anything upon that.
MR. THOMPSON: Nor I, my Lord.
MR. LINDNER:
I do not oppose it, my Lord.
THE MASTER OF THE ROLLS: We think it right to give leave to appeal,
but to what extent you will be able to get the case dealt with
in the House of Lords in the short time available is a matter
about which I cannot help you.
MR. BEYFUS: No; I shall have to go to the Appeal Committee.
THE MASTER OF THE ROLLS: You must make your application to them.
We give leave to appeal.
MR. BEYFUS: I am obliged to your Lordships.
70.
