Neutral Citation Number: [2008] EWCA Civ 1086
Case No: A3/2008/0080
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF JUDICATURE
COURT OF APPEAL (CIVIL DIVISION)
ON APPEAL FROM THE HIGH COURT OF JUSTICE
(CHANCERY DIVISION)
LEWISON J
[2007] EWHC 2394 (Ch)
Royal Courts of Justice
Strand, London, WC2A 2LL

Date: 14/10/2008
Before :

LORD JUSTICE TUCKEY
LADY JUSTICE ARDEN
and
LORD JUSTICE LONGMORE
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
Between :

DEVENISH NUTRITION LIMITED
Appellant

- and -

SANOFI-AVENTIS SA (FRANCE) & ORS
Respondents

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
(Transcript of the Handed Down Judgment of
WordWave International Limited
A Merrill Communications Company
190 Fleet Street, London EC4A 2AG
Tel No: 020 7404 1400, Fax No: 020 7831 8838
Official Shorthand Writers to the Court)
- - - - - - - -
Mr Christopher Vajda QC & Mr Andrew Burrows QC (instructed by Messrs Irwin
Mitchell) for the Appellant;Mr Tom de la Mare & Mr Brian Kennelly (instructed by
Messrs Ashurst) for the 1st, 2nd & 3rd Respondents;Mr Mark Hoskins (instructed by
Messrs Freshfield Bruckhaus Deringer) for the 4th & 5th Respondents;Mr Mark
Brealey QC & Mr Stephen Brown (instructed by Messrs Mayer Brown International
LLP) for the 6th, 7th & 8th Respondents.

Hearing dates : 17-18 June 2008
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
Judgment

Lady Justice Arden :

Introduction
1.
On this appeal, Devenish Nutrition Ltd ("Devenish") seeks to set aside the
decision of Lewison J ([2008] 2 WLR 637) on a preliminary point of law and to
establish the principle that in an action for breach of statutory duty the court can in
appropriate circumstances make a restitutionary award, that is, a sum of money
assessed by reference to the gain which the wrongdoer has made as a result of the
wrong, in place of compensatory damages, that is, damages which compensate the
claimant for loss suffered as a result of the wrongdoing.
2.
This appeal involves a fundamental issue for the purposes of the law of tort, which
may be summarised as follows. The aim of the law of tort is to compensate for
loss suffered. The courts have exceptionally also awarded damages (commonly
called "user damages") by reference to the fair value of a right of which the
defendant has wrongly deprived the claimant, and these awards have been made
even if the claimant would not himself have sought to use that right and so
incurred no loss. However, there is no question in this case of Devenish having
been deprived of a proprietary right, that is, a right arising from property, to which
such awards were formerly confined. Devenish relies on the recent case of
Attorney General v Blake [2001] AC 268, in which a remedy of the type that it
seeks in this case was awarded for a breach of contract not involving the
deprivation of any property. It contends that compensatory damages will not be an
adequate remedy. The respondents contend that this court cannot apply the
principle established in Blake to a purely personal tortious claim, and in particular
that this court is precluded by precedent, namely the decisions of this court in
Stoke-on-Trent City Council v W & J Wass Ltd and Halifax Building Society v
Thomas, from holding otherwise. The respondents accept that a restitutionary
award could be made for a proprietary tort. (By a “proprietary” tort I mean a tort
for which a claimant entitled to property or a property right is entitled to sue for
interference on the basis discussed by Lord Nicholls in Blake. Thus the
expression includes trespass to land or wrongful interference with goods. It is not
necessary to be more precise than this. The only further point to be noted is that
Devenish’s claim is not on any basis a proprietary claim.) The respondents also
contend that compensatory damages will be an adequate remedy.
3.
I will call the issue, summarised above, “the Blake issue”. I will refer below to a
restitutionary award, compensatory damages and user damages in the sense
already given, which is based on the meanings used by the judge ([14]). These
meanings are not to be treated like statutory definitions. They are not terms of art.
They are more like labels for concepts, which I will have to explain in more detail
below. These meanings are not therefore comprehensive, and it will be seen that
the various types of damages identified by these meanings are in certain respects
overlapping. Moreover, the concepts which they reflect are in some respects
fluid. Additionally, the term "restitutionary award" covers the case where the
purpose of the award of damages is to strip the defendant of his profit and the case
where its purpose is simply to cause the reversal of a benefit conferred by the
claimant. In some cases, such as breach of confidence (an example of the former)

or trespass (an example of the latter), this distinction is clear. In this case,
although the point has not been fully argued, the purpose of the award sought is
largely the former purpose as opposed to the latter. Different considerations may
apply where the purpose of the order is one, rather than the other, purpose.
4.
My essential conclusion on the Blake issue is this. The overall holding in Blake is
that the law on remedies for interference with property, damages in lieu of an
injunction, damages for breach of fiduciary duty and breach of contract should be
coherent and that the same remedies should be available in the same
circumstances, even if the cause of action is different. On that basis, a
restitutionary award is available in tort unless it is precluded by Wass or Halifax.
In my judgment, it is precluded by Wass. However, if I am wrong in that
conclusion, it is a condition of a restitutionary award that exceptional
circumstances of the kind described in Blake should be shown. That condition is
not satisfied in this case, principally because on the assumed facts damages would
be an adequate remedy.
5.
Devenish also has alternative arguments based on Community law, which I will
call the Community law issues. The respondents contend that Community law
does not require a claim for a restitutionary award to be recognised. For the
reasons given below, I consider that Community law neither prevents nor requires
the recognition in domestic law of a restitutionary award as a remedy for breach of
statutory duty for a breach of competition law.
6.
Accordingly, for the detailed reasons given below, I would dismiss this appeal.
Background to the present case
7.
The issue of principle identified above arises in the context of competition law, in
which domestic law and Community law are interwoven. Art 81 of the EC Treaty
prohibits cartels and other agreements or concerted practices that restrict
competition. The European Commission has power to impose substantial fines on
cartelists for breaches of art 81. In addition, victims of the cartel have a right to
damages for breaches of art 81 (see C-453/99 Courage Ltd v Crehan [2002] QB
507). Under s 47A of the Competition Act 1998 as amended by the Enterprise
Act 2002, a victim of a cartel may bring a follow-on action to claim personal
relief. He may do so by relying on the findings of the Commission.
8.
As to the facts, in 2001, the Commission found that certain vitamin
manufacturers, including some of the respondents, had participated in eight cartels
relating to the supply of various vitamin products, and imposed fines totalling
€855.22 million (though the fines imposed on one cartelist, BASF AG, the sixth
respondent, were subsequently reduced on appeal to the Court of First Instance).
The decision of the Commission was published in 2003 OJ L 6/1 dated 10 January
2003 (“the 2001 decision”). The size of these fines is an indication of the
seriousness of the cartels in this case.
9.
During the cartels’ existence, Devenish purchased vitamins, or products
containing vitamins, from the respondents. In general it mixed these vitamins
with other ingredients to make animal feedstuffs which it then sold on to
customers. In these follow-on proceedings, Devenish seeks damages or a

restitutionary award. Devenish’s case is that the restitutionary award should be in
a sum equal to the “overcharge” or amount of the respondents’ wrongful net
profit. (Thus, Devenish claims the amount by which the prices it was charged for
vitamins exceeded the price that would lawfully have been charged if there had
been no cartels.) There is no issue about the availability (subject to proof of loss
at trial) of a claim for damages. Moreover, notwithstanding the form of its
pleading Devenish does not rely on any claim for restitution otherwise than arising
out of the respondents’ wrongful conduct.
10.
The following preliminary issue was ordered by Master Moncaster on 2 October
2006:
'on the facts as pleaded in the Particulars of Claim and as
found in the Commission Decision of 21st November 2001
(OJ 2003 L6, p.1) . . . whether the Claimants would be
entitled to all or any of the following heads of relief as
pleaded in the Particulars of Claim (including any
subsequent amendments thereto):
a) an account of profits
b) restitution of unjust enrichment
c) exemplary damages.'
11.
This was the preliminary issue heard by the judge. The facts assumed for the
purposes of the trial of this issue are those pleaded in the particulars of claim and
are found in the 2001 decision. The parties also made reference to further
information supplied pursuant to part 18 of the CPR and to the expert economist’s
reports of Dr Cento Veljanovski. We are not, of course, concerned with whether
the facts were proved. Devenish contends that a restitutionary award is available
in law on the assumed facts and that it should be left open to the trial judge to
decide whether a restitutionary award is in fact available in the light of matters
that emerge in the course of the trial.
The judgment of the judge
12.
The judge gave a lengthy and lucid judgment. The points on which this judgment
will need to focus are as follows.
13.
With respect to Devenish’s claim for damages, the judge cited the dictum of Lord
Shaw in Watson Laidlaw & Co Ltd v Pott, Cassells and Williamson (1914) 31
RPC 104 at 117-118 that “[t]he restoration by way of compensation is therefore
accomplished to a large extent by the exercise of a sound imagination and the
practice of the broad axe.” ([27]) He took the view that the difficulties of
calculation will not be insuperable:
“[32] I am not therefore persuaded that evidential
difficulties of exact proof are insuperable difficulties to
effective compensation as a matter of domestic law. Nor am
I persuaded that the usual techniques by which the courts

award damages in domestic cases are inadequate to produce
a fair result.”
14.
The judge considered the circumstances in which a restitutionary award is made in
English law. He considered Blake and subsequent cases. The judge notes that
Lord Nicholls deals with the cases on user damages in tort and held that such
damages were compensatory in character:
“In the price or hire cases, the damages have been assessed as user
damages. This is an objective measure and is awarded where, in financial
terms, the claimant has suffered no loss. It is not a case of a claimant
having suffered financial loss but having evidential difficulties in proving
it. It is precisely because he has suffered no loss that the law's response is to
seek a different way to compensate him for the invasion of his rights.”
([81])

15.
The judge likewise characterised damages for loss of the opportunity to negotiate
a fee for releasing a covenant (sometimes called “Wrotham Park damages”) in the
same way, but adding (without comment) that Lord Nicholls had also treated them
as damages measured by the gain obtained by the defendant:
“He then considered the cases in which damages had been awarded in lieu
of an injunction, including the Wrotham Park case. He said of these cases
that:

'The measure of damages awarded in this type of case is often
analysed as damages for loss of a bargaining opportunity or,
which comes to the same, the price payable for the compulsory
acquisition of a right. This analysis is correct.' (See [2001] AC
268 at 281.)

…If analysed in the way that Lord Nicholls approved, these cases can be
seen as cases in which the claimant is compensated for what he has lost,
rather than cases in which the defendant is stripped of his gains. However,
Lord Nicholls also said of these cases that:

'In a suitable case damages for breach of contract may be
measured by the benefit gained by the wrongdoer from the
breach. The defendant must make a reasonable payment in
respect of the benefit he has gained.' (See [2001] AC 268 at
283–284.)” ([83]-[84])

16.
The judge concluded that it was only available for proprietary torts. He held that
the court was precluded by two decisions of this court from granting a
restitutionary award or an account of profits:
“[106] Stoke-on-Trent City Council v W & J Wass Ltd and
Halifax Building Society v Thomas do, in my judgment,
show that a restitutionary award is not yet generally

available in all cases of tort. Both these cases are decisions
of the Court of Appeal and hence binding on me. Stoke-on-
Trent City Council v W & J Wass Ltd was not cited or
referred to in A-G v Blake but since Lord Nicholls
participated in Stoke-on-Trent City Council v W & J Wass
Ltd (as Nicholls LJ) and gave the leading speech in A-G v
Blake it would be odd if he had undergone a Damascene
conversion about the availability of restitutionary awards
across the board in tort cases and yet had not referred to his
earlier judgment.
…
[108] On the basis of the decisions of the Court of Appeal
in Stoke-on-Trent City Council v W & J Wass Ltd and
Halifax Building Society v Thomas I conclude that whatever
the law ought to be, it is not (yet) the law that a
restitutionary award is available in all cases of tort. In my
judgment a restitutionary award is not an available remedy
in an antitrust case. If the law is to be changed, it must be
done by a higher court than this one. Moreover, even where
a restitutionary award is available, it is generally awarded
where an award of more traditionally-based compensatory
damages would be inadequate to compensate the claimant
for the invasion of his rights. Yet in the present case, Dr
Veljanovski says that the measure of restitutionary damages
is the same as the measure of compensatory damages. If
that is so, then on the assumed facts compensatory damages
would be an adequate remedy.
[109] I conclude therefore that, on the assumptions I am
required to make, a restitutionary award is not available in
the present case.
ACCOUNT OF PROFITS

[110] The defendants' primary position is that Stoke-on-Trent City
Council v W & J Wass Ltd precludes an account of profits just as it
precludes a restitutionary award. For the reasons I have given I
consider that they are right.”

17.
He therefore held that Devenish could not claim a restitutionary award in this
case.
18.
He also held that there was a problem of multiple claimants, which prevented the
award of a restitutionary award:
“[107] In addition there is (once again) the problem that there are
multiple claimants and that the claimants before the court are only

part of the class of persons injured by the tort. Goff & Jones,
discussing the hypothetical case of a factory that creates a nuisance to
a neighbourhood say (p 814 (para. 36-008)):

'The difficulties confronting a court in measuring and valuing the
benefit gained by the factory owner at the expense of the
individual householder (possibly the value of an individual
licence) in this example persuade us that, in some situations, where
there may well be multiple claimants who suffer loss from a
tortious act, a restitutionary claim should be denied. Legal
problems apart, any judicial inquiry, with the possibly complex
attendant evidence which will have to be introduced, may well be
inefficient in economic terms.’”

19.
Moreover, the judge was concerned about the procedural problems of a collective
action and the potential unfairness if some cartel victims chose a restitutionary
remedy and some an award of compensatory damages:
“[114] Second, the representative claimants (Moy Park and
Devenish) occupy different levels in the supply chain. Each
of them has downstream customers, and in the case of Moy
Park upstream suppliers as well. But unless all relevant
claimants are before the court, how is the profit made by the
defendants to be allocated? There is no clear answer to that
question. If no account is taken of whether a particular
claimant passed through price increases to a downstream
customer, then that claimant might itself be unjustly
enriched. An avoidance of unjust enrichment of a claimant
is a factor to which the ECJ drew attention in Courage Ltd v
Crehan [2002] QB 507. But if account is taken of 'pass
through', then an account of profits hardly differs from the
measure of compensatory damages which the claimants
advocate (and which I must assume will succeed).
Moreover, if the two measures differ one cannot exclude
the possibility that, if an account of profits were to be
available, some claimants with better evidence might
choose an award of compensatory damages, while other
claimants with worse evidence might choose an account of
profits. I do not think that it would be fair for remedies to
be mixed and matched.”

20.
He said that was a further difficulty. The fines would have to be taken into
account. Roche had sold its business and therefore there were difficulties in
disclosure. He held:
“[115] Third, if an account of profits were available, the
fact that all the defendants have been fined (even though the
fine imposed upon Aventis has been commuted) would

have to be taken into account. Mr Layton argues that part of
the rationale for the award of an account of profits is
deterrence. But as I see it the question of deterrence has
already been dealt with by the imposition of fines and not to
take those fines into account would be double punishment.
[116] Finally, the scale of the inquiry that would be
required in the case of these defendants all of which are or
are parts of multi-national groups must be taken into
account. The evidence about this is contained in the witness
statements of Mr McDougall, Mr Lawrence, Mr Brown and
Dr Baechli. It is very likely that disclosure of documents
would be both enormous and multi-lingual, would require
consideration of taxation and accounting methods in
differing jurisdictions and a difficult exercise in allocating
profits as between vitamins that formed part of the cartels
and other products. In addition in the case of the Roche
defendants, the relevant vitamin businesses have been sold
to a third party with the result that the Roche defendants no
longer have access to the relevant documents. Mr Layton
said that these concerns could be met by limiting the scope
of the account, but no concrete suggestion was advanced.”

21.
The judge also rejected Devenish’s claim for exemplary damages. There is no
appeal from his ruling on the point and I need say no more about it.
Submissions
22.
Mr Christopher Vajda QC, for Devenish, puts forward five basic propositions.
First, he submits that English law recognises that in certain circumstances a
wrongdoer should not profit from his wrong, whether the wrong is a breach of
contract, tort or equitable wrong. In support of this proposition, he relies on the
decision in Blake. Mr Vajda submits that Blake demonstrates that the existence
and scope of a restitutionary award is a product of historical development and of
the different approaches of common law and equity. In Blake this remedy is put
upon a general principled basis, that is, whether compensatory damages are
adequate, and whether in the circumstances the wrongdoer should be unable to
retain profits from his breach. Mr Vajda submits that it makes no difference in
principle whether the wrong relied on involves the invasion of a proprietary right
or a personal right. Mr Vajda also relies on Experience Hendrix LLP v PPX
Enterprises Inc [2003] 1 All ER (Com) 830 and Esso Petroleum Co Ltd v Niad
[2001] EWHC 6 (Ch). Mr Vajda’s second proposition is that in the light of Blake
this case is one where a restitutionary award should be available as a matter of
English law. The relevant factors are (1) the fact that compensatory damages are
not an adequate response to the wrong in this case and (2) the conduct of the
respondents. As to (1), it is sufficient to show on this application that it is
arguable that damages are inadequate. The respondents allege that the overcharge
was passed on, but this has to be shown and in any event, one of the motives of
the secret cartel was to squeeze companies like Devenish out. As to (2), Mr Vajda

relies on the fact that the conduct of the respondents was criminal and was
cynically carried out in order to make a profit for the respondents at the expense
of their customers. The cartels were kept secret from Devenish. The wrongs
complained of were committed in a contractual context. The wrong affected the
respondents’ contractual performance to Devenish. The gain consisted of a
payment by Devenish out of its assets to the respondents. Devenish has a
legitimate interest in preventing their unlawful profit making activity. Mr Vajda
submits that the wrongdoers should not be left with their ill-gotten gains. He
submits that there will plainly be evidential difficulties in proving the cartel, given
that it was a secret cartel.
23.
Mr Vajda’s third proposition is that English law does not preclude a remedy in
terms of a restitutionary award in these circumstances. He distinguishes the
decisions of this court in Stoke-on-Trent Council v Wass, Halifax Building Society
v Thomas and Forsyth-Grant v Allen [2008] EWCA Civ 505 (which applied
Wass). Again, I shall need to refer to these decisions below. Mr Vajda submits
that Wass does not concern a proprietary tort and that in any event it must be taken
to have been overruled by Blake. Halifax turns on an election made by the
building society which meant that they could not pursue a claim for the surplus on
realisation of the property. Mr Vajda submits that if the court reaches the
conclusion that as a matter of principle a restitutionary award should be available
to a single claimant, the answer should be no different simply because there are
multiple claimants in this kind of case. Such problems can be dealt with by case
management, and, after judgment, directions for accounts and enquiries. He
further submits that there are no other claimants in fact, and that the limitation
period has expired.
24.
Mr Vajda’s fourth and fifth propositions relate to Community law. His fourth
proposition is that there is nothing in Community law to prevent a restitutionary
award in this case. His fifth proposition is that Community law positively requires
a restitutionary award to be given in the circumstances of this case, and he draws
the court’s attention to the possibility of making a reference to the Court of Justice
for a preliminary ruling on this point.
25.
Mr Mark Hoskins, for the fourth and fifth respondents, submits that this court is
bound by Wass to hold that there is no remedy for breach of statutory duty save in
damages. Likewise, he submits that Halifax shows that the restitutionary remedy
is not available for every wrong. Blake on his submission concerns an account of
profits for a breach of contract. There was no suggestion that the House of Lords
was developing the law across the board for tort. The information in question,
which was contained in Mr Blake’s autobiography, would have constituted
confidential information in respect of which a fiduciary obligation was owed had
it not been for the publication of information prior to the publication of the book.
Mr Hoskins submits that likewise, Esso and Experience Hendrix were breach of
contract cases. In any event, the guiding principle for the purpose of determining
when a restitutionary award was available were those set out by Lord Nicholls in
Blake. A restitutionary award would only be made in an exceptional case, and
where the remedies were inadequate.
26.
Mr Hoskins also submits that in the light of the 2001 decision it is not open to the
court to say that there has not been imposed a sufficient deterrent and that the

same applies to the restitution of profits. He submits that the margin squeeze
claim is not incapable of calculation using the approach of the "broad axe”
principle applicable to the assessment of damages and referred to by the judge.
Mr Hoskins further submits that there can be no account of profits because the
Commission’s fines have already taken into account the conduct of his client. He
submits that it is not shown that compensatory damages will be inadequate, and
that Dr Veljanovoski has been able to calculate the compensatory claim of
Devenish. Mr Vajda seeks to limit the claim to the amount of the overcharge. Mr
Hoskins submits that this is not a true account of profits claim.
27.
Mr Hoskins submits that the requirements of Community law are satisfied by an
award of compensatory damages. In von Colson, the point was that the
compensation had to be adequate in respect of the damages claimed. To the
extent that Devenish seeks to obtain a restitutionary award when it passed the
overcharge on to its customers, it is going beyond obtaining compensatory
damages for its loss.
28.
Mr Hoskins submits that, even if the court takes the view that a restitutionary
award is open in law to Devenish, it should not take that step in this case for the
reason given by the judge at [114] of his judgment, namely that it might lead some
claimants to claim a restitutionary award, and others to claim compensatory
damages. The resulting mix would not be fair to the respondents. It could lead to
double liability or inconsistent determinations. Devenish makes no submission as
to how the problems of multiple claimants could be dealt with. A restitutionary
award should not be made where there are multiple claimants: see Goff & Jones,
The Law of Restitution, (7 ed) (2007) para. 36-008.
29.
Mr Mark Brealey QC, for the sixth to eighth respondents, including BASF,
submits that damages on the Wrotham Park principle (so called after the decision
of Brightman J. in Wrotham Park Estate Co v Parkside Homes Ltd [1974] 1 WLR
798) compensate the claimant for a loss of a bargaining opportunity. This was
held to be the position by Sir Thomas Bingham MR in Jaggard v Sawyer [1995] 1
WLR 269. He submits that this type of award is by reference to the gains made,
but it is not gains-based. Mr Brealey accepts that the margin squeeze claim is an
additional claim. He submits that the calculation of damages is not so difficult as
to make it impossible. He submits that in WWF-World Wide Fund for Nature
(formerly World Wildlife Fund) and another v World Wrestling Federation
Entertainment Inc [2008] 1 All ER 74 this court decided that Wrotham Park
damages were compensatory and not gains-based.
30.
As to the impact of Blake on Wass, Mr Brealey submits that there is a distinction
between the expropriation of a person's right and the mere interference with it. In
Wass, there could not be a notional bargain where the right in question is the right
to hold the market.
31.
Mr Tom de la Mare, for the first to third respondents, submits that Devenish is
seeking the restitutionary award in order to avoid the passing-on defence. The
contractual relationship of the parties was in reality irrelevant in the present case.
Mr de la Mare makes a number of submissions on Community law to which I
refer below. He goes so far as to say that for the courts to declare that a
restitutionary award should be available in competition cases would “conflict with

basic notions of legal certainty”. That submission must be rejected at the outset as
inconsistent with the common law system.
32.
I have referred to counsel in the order in which they made their submissions. I
have not set out all the submissions, and, in particular, I have not referred to
arguments made by them that had already been put forward in other submissions.
In the result, the submissions attributed by me to counsel give a disproportionate
impression of their considerable contribution in this case, for which, together with
the appellant’s submissions, I would express my gratitude and admiration.
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS
(A) THE BLAKE ISSUE
1. Introduction
33.
The Blake issue involves a number of sub-issues:
i)
Was the judge correct to hold that a restitutionary award
cannot be made for a non-proprietary tort?
ii)
Would a restitutionary remedy be available in the
circumstances of this case? In particular, was the judge
correct to hold that a restitutionary remedy would not be
available because compensatory damages would have been
adequate?
iii)
Was the judge right to hold that a further difficulty,
precluding the grant of a restitutionary award was that not
all potential claimants were before the court?
34.
Before I explain my reasoning on these issues, I need to say more about the nature
of the concepts of compensatory damages, user damages and restitutionary
awards, and about the nature of the account of profits sought in this case.
35.
Each of these concepts describes a remedy for a wrong, be it a breach of contract,
a tort or an equitable wrong. The remedies are not, however necessarily to be
attributed to a single type of wrong. This point was graphically made by the late
Professor Peter Birks in an article dealing with a proposed redraft of the American
Law Institute’s Restatement of Restitution:
“Usurping the Claims of Unjust Enrichment
Scott and Seavey, writing about Restatement in the 1930s,
spoke of ‘the tripartite division of the law into contracts,
torts and restitution’. That is, by any standards, a horrible
division. On the same level would be a division of animals
between carnivores, herbivores and amphibians. The third
term tells you the habitat, the first two the eating habit. It
follows that the terms must cut across each other.
Alligators are carnivorous and amphibious. In the same
way restitution cuts across contracts and torts. If you

promise to repay a sum which I gave you, I have a
contractual right to restitution. Again, for many wrongs, be
they torts or breaches of equitable duty or breaches of
contract, I can get restitution (gain-based recovery).” (A
Letter to America: The New Restatement of Restitution
(2003) 3 GJF 1 at 13)”
36.
In general, the common golden thread that runs through each of these three
categories of remedy mentioned above is that the claimant has suffered loss. But
that is not always the case (see, for example, user damages discussed below).
Similarly, in an action for breach of fiduciary duty, an account of profits can be
awarded in circumstances where the claimant has suffered no loss, as in Regal
(Hastings) v Gulliver [1967] 2 AC 134 (and a claim for an account of profits
consequent on a breach of duty could arise even though there is no misuse of a
property right, as where a director uses a power to make calls on shares for a
collateral purpose). Moreover, user damages are not always assessed by reference
to the fair price for what has been taken from the claimant. They may be assessed
by reference to the profit that the defendant has made (see, for example, Ministry
of Defence v Ashman [1993] EGLR 102). Wrotham Park damages likewise may
be awarded even though there is no loss. But the user damages and Wrotham
Park damages still have an element of compensation within them in this sense,
that while there may be no actual loss they are clearly cases where the law takes
the view as a matter of policy that the claimants if they prove their claims are
entitled to substantial compensation for the mere invasion of their rights.
37.
It follows that the categories of damages identified above are not mutually
exclusive. User damages can be restitutionary: they can be awarded where the
claimant has suffered no loss and on the basis that the defendant is ordered to pay
a sum by reference to the gain he would otherwise make. Damages for trespass to
property, for instance, are awarded on the basis of market rent even if the claimant
would not have let the property if vacant (see Swordheath Properties Ltd v Tabet
[1979] 1 WLR 285). At the same time they can be described as compensatory.
The view that they combine elements of both compensatory and restitutionary
awards is supported by the decision of the Privy Council in Inverugie Investments
Ltd v Hackett [1995] 1 WLR 713 at 718B. Damages for trespass to land, for
instance, are intended to compensate the claimant for being kept out of his land on
whatever basis they are assessed. I do not therefore agree with the judge that user
damages or Wrotham Park damages are necessarily compensatory. Nor do I
consider that Lord Nicholls so held. Lord Nicholls considered that user damages
were probably best regarded as exceptions to the general rule that damages are
assessed on the basis that they compensate the claimant for his loss or injury (page
279E). He also regarded Wrotham Park damages as “payment [by the defendant]
in respect of the benefit he has gained” (page 284A). If user damages and
Wrotham Park damages were purely compensatory, they would not have been
stepping stones to the conclusion that the court could grant an account of profits
for a breach of contract.
38.
What, however, does distinguish user damages from other compensatory damages
is the fact that they are in general awarded because the defendant has made
improper use of an asset of the claimant. In economic terms, there has been a

transfer of value for which the wrongdoer must account. But that is also a feature
of the present case. Devenish seeks in economic terms, by means of its claim for
an account of profits for breach of statutory duty, to recover the amount of the
overcharge that it has paid to the respondents out of its assets and in diminution of
its net worth. Not all non-proprietary torts share this feature: for example, this
feature is not present in claims for damages for defamation or personal injury. It
is, however, often present in claims for breach of contract and for invasion of a
statutory right where rights of property in the broadest sense are invaded for the
benefit of the wrongdoer. A contractual right is a form of property (though it
lacks some of the qualities of a property right). If the law of remedies were to be
required to be coherent in economic terms, and this were the critical factor, the
same remedies ought to be provided in each of these situations. However, even
so, they would under Blake be subject to strict judicial control through the
requirement for exceptional circumstances.
39.
Devenish claims an account of profits. Following Blake, it is clear that this can be
made in claims for breach of contract as well as in the case of proprietary torts.
There is no reason why an order that the defendant accounts for his profits to the
claimant should necessarily be of the gross profit or of 100% of the profit: see,
for example, Hendrix, considered below and Ministry of Defence v Ashman, per
Hoffmann LJ. Where an account of profits is granted instead of an award of
compensatory damages, and is compensatory in its objective, there is flexibility in
the percentage of the profit that is awarded and in its calculation.
40.
I bear in mind that in the recent case of WWF-World Wide Fund for Nature
(formerly World Wildlife Fund) and another v World Wrestling Federation
Entertainment Inc, this court had to consider whether the dismissal of an earlier
claim for an “account of profits” (made on the Blake basis) in an action for breach
of contract rendered res judicata a later claim for Wrotham Park damages. The
contention was that the earlier claim was “gains-based”, which was the basis on
which the application for dismissal of the later claim had been made. As I read
the judgment, this was taken to mean solely or substantially gains-based. In the
alternative it was contended that the later claim was a juridically highly similar
remedy to a gains-based claim. Chadwick LJ, with whom Maurice Kay and
Wilson LJJ agreed, considered a large number of authorities, including Blake, in
which the juridical basis of Wrotham Park damages has been considered. This
examination shows there have been different views on this over time. At all
events, Chadwick LJ recognised that the labels “compensatory” and “gains-based”
did not really describe the basis on which the court acted, and he went on to
accept that the account sought in that case was in any event a “juridically highly
similar remedy” to a gains-based claim:
“59….To label an award of damages on the Wrotham Park basis as a
'compensatory' remedy and an order for an account of profits as a
'gains-based' remedy does not assist an understanding of the
principles on which the court acts. The two remedies should, I think,
each be seen as a flexible response to the need to compensate the
claimant for the wrong which has been done to him.
60. It follows therefore that, although I would reject the premise on
which the contentions in para. 4 of the amended application notice

are based—that an award of damages on the Wrotham Park basis is
not an award of compensatory damages, but it is properly to be
characterised as a gains-based award—I would accept that, on a true
analysis, the allegation in sub-para. (d)—that the remedy now sought
by the Fund (an award of damages on the Wrotham Park basis) is 'a
juridically highly similar remedy to, the relief [an account of profits]
previously sought'—is well-founded.”
41.
This is, I accept, a difficult case but I do not consider that the decision in this case
affects the point that I have been making about user damages and Wrotham Park
damages. I have proceeded on the basis that Wrotham Park damages are assessed
on a basis that affords compensation to the claimant. That does not mean that
such damages do not also deprive the defendant of a benefit that he has received,
and that is clearly stated by Lord Nicholls. The judge, in my judgment, was in
error to assume otherwise ([97]-[98]). Chadwick LJ, clearly recognized that the
labels "compensatory" and “gains-based" did not comprehensively describe the
basis of assessment of damages in the circumstances where a restitutionary award
is made. I do not, therefore, consider that the WWF decision removes the point I
have made. I am, in any event, supported in my conclusion by the fact that
Chadwick LJ considered that Wrotham Park damages were "essentially” (not
necessarily entirely) compensatory and that they were a juridically highly similar
remedy to a gains-based remedy. If I am wrong on what I have said about
Wrotham Park damages, the conclusion I have reached on user damages is not
affected.
2. The first sub-issue: was the judge correct to hold that a restitutionary award cannot
be made for a non-proprietary tort?
42.
To answer this sub-issue, I consider under separate sub-headings the general basis
for assessing damages in tort, the decision of the House of Lords in Blake, the
cases applying Blake, and earlier decisions of this court relied by the respondents
as constituting binding precedent precluding this court from holding that Blake
applies to non-proprietary torts. I conclude on this sub-issue that it is consistent
with Blake for a restitutionary award to be available in the case of a non-
proprietary tort (see [58] below), but that the decision of this court in Wass
precludes this court from reaching that conclusion (see [76] below).
3. General basis for assessing damages in tort
43.
As Lord Nicholls explains in Blake, the basic principle is that the remedy for a tort
is compensatory damages: Livingstone v Raywards Coal Company (1880) 5 App
Cas 25. Lord Blackburn held that the general rule was that:
“where any injury is to be compensated by damages, in
settling the sum of money to be given to reparation of
damages you should as nearly as possible get at that sum of
money which will put the party who has been injured or
how has suffered, in the same position as he would have
been in if he had not sustained the wrong for which he is
now getting his compensation or reparation. That must be
qualified by a great many things which may arise –such, for

instance, as by the consideration, whether the damage has
been maliciously done…”
44.
 In that case, user damages were awarded for the unauthorised removal of coal
from beneath the appellant’s land, even though the site was too small for the
appellant to have mined the coal himself. The appellant was also awarded
damages for the damage done to the houses on the surface.
45.
But the rule about compensation for loss suffered is not an absolute one. It is
noteworthy in the present context that a majority of the House would have made a
different and by implication a higher award if the conduct had been deliberate:
see per Lord Hatherley at 34, per Lord Blackburn at 39 and 42. Lord Hatherley
obiter considered, however, that no damages should be awarded for the use that
the respondents had made of the appellant’s land by travelling across for in doing
this they caused him no loss (at 38). This contrasts with the point made by Lord
Halsbury in The Mediana and by Lord Shaw in Watson Laidlaw, considered by
Lord Nicholls in Blake, as set out below.
4. The decision of the House of Lords in Attorney General v Blake
46.
I shall need to consider this decision in detail, but the bottom line is that this case
establishes that a restitutionary award is available for breach of contract. The
leading speech was that of Lord Nicholls, with whom the three other members of
the House agreed.
47.
The facts are well known. Indeed, Lord Nicholls begins his speech with the
memorable words:
"My Lords, George Blake is a notorious, self-confessed
traitor."
48.
George Blake was a former member of the secret intelligence service, and he had
agreed not to divulge any official information gained as a result of his
employment. He was convicted of disclosing valuable secret information to the
Soviet Union and sentenced to forty-two years imprisonment. He escaped and
lived in Moscow. He wrote an autobiography, using information obtained in the
course of his employment. This information was no longer confidential and no
measurable loss was suffered by the disclosure. However, the Attorney General
brought an action against the defendant claiming damages for breach of fiduciary
duty and the payment of all monies received or to be received by him from his
publisher with a view to ensuring that he should not enjoy the fruits of his
treachery. The information was no longer secret or confidential, and so no
substantial damages would be awarded for breach of confidence. There had,
however, been a gross invasion of the Crown’s rights. The House, by a majority,
held that in exceptional cases where the normal remedies of damages, specific
performance and injunction were inadequate compensation for breach of contract,
the court could, if justice demanded it, grant a restitutionary award.
49.
There are four sub-headings in part of Lord Nicholls’ speech which contains his
general analysis of the law: interference with rights of property, breach of trust
and fiduciary duty, damages under the Chancery Amendment Act 1858 (referred

to below as Lord Cairns’ Act) and breach of contract. There is therefore no
passage dealing with non-proprietary torts. Lord Nicholls uses the first three
topics as stepping stones to his conclusion about breach of contract. His reasoning
is analogical. The methodology is to expose the similarities and differences
between torts and other wrongs and the differences between law and equity, with
the aim of understanding those differences, identifying the underlying principles
and ensuring where appropriate coherence in the law of remedies. The theme is
thus coherence in the law of remedies. He makes it clear at several points that he
is concerned with the principles that lie behind the case law. His conclusion on
breach of contract claims is that no distinction can be drawn between the topics
covered by the earlier subheadings and, there being no policy reason for not
having an account of profits as a remedy for a breach of contract, that remedy was
available for a breach of contract too.
50.
Examples of the methodology which I have described can be found throughout
Lord Nicholls' speech. For example, at 278D, Lord Nicholls compares the general
approach regarding assessment of damages in contract and for proprietary torts.
At 279D, he seeks to identify a way of aligning user damages within the basic
compensatory measure. He concludes that where the claimant has suffered no
loss but user damages are awarded, "[s]uch awards, are probably best regarded as
an exception to the general rule.” At 279E, Lord Nicholls concludes that courts of
equity went further than common law courts. At 280D, Lord Nicholls concludes
that it is difficult to see why equity required a wrongdoer to account for all his
profits whereas the common law required a wrongdoer merely to pay a reasonable
fee the use of another's property. He concludes that the difference arose simply as
an accident of history. At 281E, Lord Nicholls compares damages at common law
from violation of a property right and damages in lieu of an injunction. At 282, he
turns to consider the remedies available for breach of contract "[a]gainst this
background". At 282H, he considers Wrotham Park damages under the heading
of breach of contract. At 285D, Lord Nicholls concludes that there is no good
reason why an account of profits should be available for a breach of confidence
but not for a breach of the contract that governs the parties’ relationship.
51.
At the outset of his discussion of the law, Lord Nicholls noted that the basic
principle regarding assessment of damages is that they are compensatory for loss
or injury:
“So I turn to established, basic principles. I shall first set the
scene by noting how the court approaches the question of
financial recompense for interference with rights of
property. As with breaches of contract, so with tort, the
general principle regarding assessment of damages is that
they are compensatory for loss or injury. The general rule is
that, in the oft quoted words of Lord Blackburn, the
measure of damages is to be, as far as possible, that amount
of money which will put the injured party in the same
position he would have been in had he not sustained the
wrong: Livingstone v Rawyards Coal Co (1880) 5 App
Cas 25, 39. Damages are measured by the plaintiff's loss,
not the defendant's gain. But the common law, pragmatic as

ever, has long recognised that there are many commonplace
situations where a strict application of this principle would
not do justice between the parties. Then compensation for
the wrong done to the plaintiff is measured by a different
yardstick. A trespasser who enters another's land may cause
the landowner no financial loss. In such a case damages are
measured by the benefit received by the trespasser, namely,
by his use of the land. The same principle is applied where
the wrong consists of use of another's land for depositing
waste, or by using a path across the land or using passages
in an underground mine. In this type of case the damages
recoverable will be, in short, the price a reasonable person
would pay for the right of user: see Whitwham v
Westminster Brymbo Coal and Coke Co [1896] 2 Ch 528,
and the "wayleave" cases such as Martin v Porter (1839) 5
M & W 351 and Jegon v Vivian (1871) 6 Ch App 742. A
more recent example was the non-removal of a floating
dock, in Penarth Dock Engineering Co Ltd v Pounds.
[1963] 1 Lloyd’s Rep 359.
The same principle is applied to the wrongful detention of
goods. An instance is the much cited decision of the Court
of Appeal in Strand Electric and Engineering Co Ltd v
Brisford Entertainments Ltd [1952] 2 QB 246, concerning
portable switchboards. But the principle has a distinguished
ancestry. The Earl of Halsbury LC famously asked in The
Mediana [1900] AC 113, 117, that if a person took away a
chair from his room and kept it for 12 months, could
anybody say you had a right to diminish the damages by
showing that I did not usually sit in that chair, or that there
were plenty of other chairs in the room? To the same effect
was Lord Shaw's telling example in Watson, Laidlaw & Co
Ltd v Pott, Cassels and Williamson (1914) 31 RPC 104,
119. It bears repetition:
"If A, being a liveryman, keeps his horse standing idle in
the stable, and B, against his wish or without his
knowledge, rides or drives it out, it is no answer to A for B
to say: 'Against what loss do you want to be restored? I
restore the horse. There is no loss. The horse is none the
worse; it is the better for the exercise.'"
Lord Shaw prefaced this observation with a statement of
general principle:
"wherever an abstraction or invasion of property has
occurred, then, unless such abstraction or invasion were to
be sanctioned by law, the law ought to yield a recompense
under the category or principle … either of price or of hire."

That was a patent infringement case. The House of Lords
held that damages should be assessed on the footing of a
royalty for every infringing article.
This principle is established and not controversial. More
difficult is the alignment of this measure of damages within
the basic compensatory measure. Recently there has been a
move towards applying the label of restitution to awards of
this character: see, for instance, Ministry of Defence v
Ashman, [1993] 2 EGLR 102105 and Ministry of Defence v
Thompson [1993] 2 EGLR 107. However that may be, these
awards cannot be regarded as conforming to the strictly
compensatory measure of damage for the injured person's
loss unless loss is given a strained and artificial meaning.
The reality is that the injured person's rights were invaded
but, in financial terms, he suffered no loss. Nevertheless the
common law has found a means to award him a sensibly
calculated amount of money. Such awards are probably best
regarded as an exception to the general rule.” (pages 278-9)
52.
Lord Nicholls noted that, in some cases, the wrongdoer had to yield up all his
gains, as in a patent infringement case. He held that in this type of case equity
considered that the appropriate response to the violation of the plaintiff’s right was
that the defendant should surrender all his gains and that he should do so
irrespective of whether the violation had caused the plaintiff any financial
immeasurable loss. Gains were to be disgorged even though they were not shown
to correspond with a disadvantage suffered by the other party.
“Considered as a matter of principle, it is difficult to see why equity
required the wrongdoer to account for all his profits in these cases,
whereas the common law's response was to require a wrongdoer
merely to pay a reasonable fee for use of another's land or goods. In
all these cases rights of property were infringed. This difference in
remedial response appears to have arisen simply as an accident of
history.” (page 280)

53.
Lord Nicholls referred to damages for breach of fiduciary duty and damages under
Lord Cairns’ Act and successor Acts, where damages are awarded in lieu of an
injunction:
“The measure of damages awarded in this type of case is
often analysed as damages for loss of a bargaining
opportunity or, which comes to the same, the price payable
for the compulsory acquisition of a right. This analysis is
correct. The court's refusal to grant an injunction means that
in practice the defendant is thereby permitted to perpetuate
the wrongful state of affairs he has brought about. But this
analysis takes the matter now under discussion no further
forward. A property right has value to the extent only that

the court will enforce it or award damages for its
infringement. The question under discussion is whether the
court will award substantial damages for an infringement
when no financial loss flows from the infringement and,
moreover, in a suitable case will assess the damages by
reference to the defendant's profit obtained from the
infringement. The cases mentioned above show that the
courts habitually do that very thing.” (page 281)

54.
Lord Nicholls referred to Wrotham Park Estate Co Ltd v Parkside Homes Ltd
[1974] 1 WLR 789, where Brightman J awarded damages in lieu of an injunction
for development of land in breach of a restrictive covenant based on the amount
which the owner of the land could reasonably have demanded if he had been
asked and agreed to release of the covenant. This award was made even though
there was no diminution in value of the land due to the development. Lord
Nicholls approved this case, observing:
“In reaching his conclusion the judge applied by analogy the cases
mentioned above concerning the assessment of damages when a
defendant has invaded another's property rights but without
diminishing the value of the property. I consider he was right to do
so. Property rights are superior to contractual rights in that, unlike
contractual rights, property rights may survive against an indefinite
class of persons. However, it is not easy to see why, as between the
parties to a contract, a violation of a party's contractual rights
should attract a lesser degree of remedy than a violation of his
property rights. As Lionel D Smith has pointed out in his article
"Disgorgement of the profits of Breach of Contract: Property,
Contract and 'Efficient Breach'" (1995) 24 Can BLJ 121, it is not
clear why it should be any more permissible to expropriate
personal rights than it is permissible to expropriate property rights.
…
The Wrotham Park case, therefore, still shines, rather as a
solitary beacon, showing that in contract as well as tort
damages are not always narrowly confined to recoupment
of financial loss. In a suitable case damages for breach of
contract may be measured by the benefit gained by the
wrongdoer from the breach. The defendant must make a
reasonable payment in respect of the benefit he has gained.
” (pages 283-4)
55.
Lord Nicholls’ conclusions were expressed in the following passage:
“My conclusion is that there seems to be no reason, in
principle, why the court must in all circumstances rule out
an account of profits as a remedy for breach of contract. I
prefer to avoid the unhappy expression "restitutionary
damages". Remedies are the law's response to a wrong (or,

more precisely, to a cause of action). When, exceptionally,
a just response to a breach of contract so requires, the court
should be able to grant the discretionary remedy of
requiring a defendant to account to the plaintiff for the
benefits he has received from his breach of contract. In the
same way as a plaintiff's interest in performance of a
contract may render it just and equitable for the court to
make an order for specific performance or grant an
injunction, so the plaintiff's interest in performance may
make it just and equitable that the defendant should retain
no benefit from his breach of contract.
The state of the authorities encourages me to reach this
conclusion, rather than the reverse. The law recognises that
damages are not always a sufficient remedy for breach of
contract. This is the foundation of the court's jurisdiction to
grant the remedies of specific performance and injunction.
Even when awarding damages, the law does not adhere
slavishly to the concept of compensation for financially
measurable loss. When the circumstances require, damages
are measured by reference to the benefit obtained by the
wrongdoer. This applies to interference with property
rights. Recently, the like approach has been adopted to
breach of contract. Further, in certain circumstances an
account of profits is ordered in preference to an award of
damages. Sometimes the injured party is given the choice:
either compensatory damages or an account of the
wrongdoer's profits. Breach of confidence is an instance of
this. If confidential information is wrongfully divulged in
breach of a non-disclosure agreement, it would be nothing
short of sophistry to say that an account of profits may be
ordered in respect of the equitable wrong but not in respect
of the breach of contract which governs the relationship
between the parties. With the established authorities going
thus far, I consider it would be only a modest step for the
law to recognise openly that, exceptionally, an account of
profits may be the most appropriate remedy for breach of
contract. It is not as though this step would contradict some
recognised principle applied consistently throughout the
law to the grant or withholding of the remedy of an account
of profits. No such principle is discernible.
The main argument against the availability of an account of
profits as a remedy for breach of contract is that the
circumstances where this remedy may be granted will be
uncertain. This will have an unsettling effect on commercial
contracts where certainty is important. I do not think these
fears are well founded. I see no reason why, in practice, the
availability of the remedy of an account of profits need
disturb settled expectations in the commercial or consumer

world. An account of profits will be appropriate only in
exceptional circumstances. Normally the remedies of
damages, specific performance and injunction, coupled with
the characterisation of some contractual obligations as
fiduciary, will provide an adequate response to a breach of
contract. It will be only in exceptional cases, where those
remedies are inadequate, that any question of accounting
for profits will arise. No fixed rules can be prescribed. The
court will have regard to all the circumstances, including
the subject matter of the contract, the purpose of the
contractual provision which has been breached, the
circumstances
in
which
the
breach
occurred,
the
consequences of the breach and the circumstances in which
relief is being sought. A useful general guide, although not
exhaustive, is whether the plaintiff had a legitimate interest
in preventing the defendant's profit-making activity and,
hence, in depriving him of his profit.” (page 284-5)

56.
Lord Goff and Lord Browne-Wilkinson agreed with Lord Nicholls. Lord Steyn
gave a concurring judgment. He considered that practical justice strongly
militated in favour of granting an order for disgorgement of profits against Blake
([292D).
57.
The House by a majority (Lord Hobhouse dissenting) proceeded to grant an
account of profits for the amounts due to George Blake from his publisher under
his publishing agreement.
58.
As I read the speech of Lord Nicholls, the making of a restitutionary award does
not depend on whether a property right has been infringed or whether the award is
compensatory for loss or not. Rather, it depends on whether damages alone would
be a sufficient remedy in the eyes of the law for the wrong that has occurred. If
this is right, and moreover an account of profits can be ordered for a breach of
contract that, as in Blake, does not involve interference with a proprietary right, it
would not, in my judgment, be inconsistent with the reasoning of Lord Nicholls in
the passages cited above if it were also available in the case of non-proprietary
tort. This point can be supported by pointing to the fact that a claim for damages
under Lord Cairns’ Act may also be available for a non-proprietary tort. Lord
Nicholls’ speech does not suggest that an account of profits is not available on a
like basis in the case of a non-proprietary tort. He draws on cases in which
damages are assessed by reference to the benefit obtained by the wrongdoer.
This can occur in cases in tort. However, this is not a line of thought which I can
pursue if as the respondents submit this court has held that such an award can only
be made in the case of a proprietary tort in a manner binding on, this court on this
appeal. Therefore, I need to consider the decisions of this court in Wass and
Halifax to which I turn below. Before I do so I offer some other observations on
Blake and consider two cases that have followed.
59.
In Blake, Lord Nicholls treats a restitutionary award as another arrow in the
court’s quiver of remedies. Lord Nicholls emphasises that this particular arrow in

the court’s quiver of remedies is only pulled out in exceptional circumstances.
This harks back to a remark which he made earlier in his judgment:
“The broad proposition that a wrongdoer should not be
allowed to profit from his wrong has an obvious attraction.
The corollary is that the person wronged may recover the
amount of this profit when he has suffered no financially
measurable loss. As Glidewell LJ observed in Halifax
Building Society v Thomas [1996] Ch 217, 229, the
corollary is not so obviously persuasive.” (page 278)
60.
 Lord Nicholls offers a general test, namely that the claimant has a legitimate
interest in stripping the wrongdoer of his profit. There was no single feature which
was requisite for the purpose of ordering an account of profits: it was the
combination of the fact that the contract was clearly drafted with a view to
protecting national security, the facts that the information in question had
originally been confidential to the Crown and that Blake had been in breach of
fiduciary duty in misusing it, the deliberate nature of the breach of contract, the
fact that Blake intended to benefit from earlier treacherous conduct, and the
absence of an appropriate remedy in compensatory damages that led the House to
order an account.
61.
Before I turn to Wass and Halifax, I will first consider two cases that have applied
Blake. In each case, the claim was based on a breach of contract.
5. Cases applying Blake
5.1 Experience Hendrix v PPX Enterprises Inc [2003] 1 All ER (Comm) 830
62.
The issue in this case was whether an account of profits or damages could be
awarded for a breach of a settlement agreement between the two parties relating to
the exploitation of musical recordings. The agreement did not permit the use of
certain recordings that the defendant had in fact exploited. This had resulted in no
loss to the claimant who was not the owner of the recordings, and indeed in
certain circumstances envisaged the destruction of those recordings. The
appellant amended its case to claim damages on the basis of what could
reasonably have been demanded for a release of the contractual prohibition. In the
alternative, the claimant claimed an account of profits. The judge had refused to
award either form of relief.
63.
The leading judgment was given by Mance LJ with whom Peter Gibson LJ (who
delivered a concurring judgment) and Hooper J agreed. Mance LJ held:
“[16] The inspiration for the appellant's amendment of its case was
the House of Lords decision in A-G v Blake (Jonathan Cape Ltd, third
party) [2001] 1 AC 268. This marks a new start in this area of law.
The exposition by counsel before us of prior authority threw light on
considerations which may still be relevant to its future development.
But, as I see the decision in Blake's case, it freed us from some
constraints that prior authority in this court (particularly Surrey CC v
Bredero Homes Ltd, [1993] 1 WLR 1361 and some of the reasoning

in Jaggard v Sawyer [1995] 1 WLR 269) would have imposed. To
apply Lord Steyn's words, Blake's case leaves future courts with the
task of 'hammering out on the anvil of decided cases' when and how
far remedies such as the appellant now seeks should be available. The
original Nibelungen produced a powerful image of restitution. The
appellant invites us to fashion a modern and more deliberate
equivalent on Jimi Hendrix's legacy.”
64.
The case had certain similarities to Blake For instance:
“As in Blake, we are concerned with a breach of a negative
obligation, and PPX did do the very thing it had contracted
not to do.” (per Mance LJ at [36])

65.
Mance LJ observed that it would be anomalous and unjust if the defendant could
avoid paying royalties for the recordings in question when it had to pay royalties
in respect of other recordings which they were permitted to exploit. However, the
case itself did not justify the imposition of a full Blake account of profits as:
“…the breaches, though deliberate, took place in a
commercial
context.
PPX,
though
knowingly
and
deliberately breaching its contract, acted as it did in the
course of a business, to which it no doubt gave some
expenditure of time and effort and probably the use of
connections and some skill …An account of profits would
involve a detailed assessment of such matters, which, as is
very clear from Blake, should not lightly be ordered… I
would confine any financial remedy to an order that [the
defendant] pay a reasonable sum for its use of material in
breach of the settlement agreement. That sum can properly
be described as being "such some as might reasonably have
been demanded" by [the appellant] as a quid pro quo for
agreeing to permit the two licences into which [the
defendant] entered in breach of the settlement agreement,
which was the approach adopted by Brightman J. in the
Wrotham Park case.” ([44], [45])
66.
This court was only concerned with questions of principle, but Mance LJ added
that he would be surprised if the appropriate rate of royalty was less than twice
that agreed in respect of the recordings for which permission to exploit had been
given.
67.
In his concurring judgment, Peter Gibson J. observed that:
“Although the Wrotham Park case related to an
infringement of a property right, there having been a breach
of a restrictive covenant imposed for the benefit of an
estate, it is noticeable that Lord Nicholls did not treat the
significance of the case as so limited. He discussed the case

in the section of his judgment (commencing at [2001] 1 AC
268 at 282) dealing with breach of contract. It is apparent
that he regarded the case as a guiding authority on
compensation for breach of a contractual obligation. True it
is that the action was brought against the successor in title
of the original covenantor; but it could hardly be suggested
that the result would have been different if the parties had
been the original contracting parties.”

68.
Accordingly, the court directed that the damages for breach of contract should be
assessed by reference to a notional fee for permission to exploit the recordings in
question. This would represent all or some of the profits which the defendant had
wrongfully earned. But the significance for this case of Hendrix goes beyond this
point. I said in [2] of this judgment that the courts have awarded damages
(commonly called "user damages") by reference to the fair value of a right of
which the defendant has wrongly deprived the claimant, and these awards have
been made even if the claimant would not himself have sought to use that right
and so incurred no loss. It is now clear that the principle underlying user damages
does not depend on there being some misuse of a property right of the claimant. It
was awarded in the Hendrix case on the basis of a breach of a contractual
obligation. This is an important point. It is paradigmatic of a cultural change in
the law in favour of the classification of remedies on a coherent basis rather than
on the basis of some formulaic division between different wrongs. As Lord
Nicholls observed in Blake, in the context of contractual rights, “it is not clear
why it should be any more permissible to expropriate personal rights than it is
permissible to expropriate property rights.”

5.2 Esso Petroleum Co Ltd v Niad Ltd [2001] 1 All ER (D) 324
69.
The defendant (“Niad”) had entered into a five year exclusive agreement with
Esso, requiring Niad to buy all its requirements of motor fuels from Esso. A
further agreement was entered into under a “Pricewatch” scheme whereby Niad
agreed to match the fuel prices by charging the same as its lowest priced
competitor in the area and Esso agreed to compensate it for doing so. In breach of
this agreement Niad charged higher prices. The judge, Sir Andrew Morritt VC,
held that if Esso so elected an account of profits should be made in this case. His
reasons were as follows:
“[63] In my judgment the remedy of an account of profits should be
available for breaches of contract such as these. First, damages is an
inadequate remedy. It is almost impossible to attribute lost sales to a
breach by one out of several hundred dealers who operated Pricewatch.
Second, the obligation to implement and maintain the recommended pump
prices was fundamental to Pricewatch. Failure to observe it gives the lie to
the advertising campaign by which it was publicised and therefore
undermines the effectiveness of Pricewatch in achieving the benefits
intended for both Esso and all its dealers within Pricewatch. Third,

complaint was made of Niad on four occasions. On all of them Niad
appeared to comply without demur. It now appears that the breaches of its
obligation were much more extensive than Esso at first thought. Fourth,
Esso undoubtedly has a legitimate interest in preventing Niad from
profiting from its breach of obligation.
[64] I turn then to the restitutionary remedy. It is undoubted that Niad
obtained a benefit, in the form of the price support, to which it was only
entitled if it complied with its obligation to implement and maintain the
recommended pump prices to be supported. In these circumstances it can
hardly be denied that Niad was enriched to the extent that it charged pump
prices in excess of the recommended prices. The enrichment was unjust
because it was obtained in breach of contract. It was obtained at the
expense of Esso because Esso was providing price support for a lower
price than that charged by Niad. I can see no reason why this remedy
should be unavailable to Esso if it wishes to pursue it. Indeed it appears to
me to be the most appropriate remedy in that it matches most closely the
reality of the case, namely that Niad took an extra benefit to which it was
not entitled. It is just that it should be made to restore it to its effective
source.”

70.
Accordingly an account of profits was awarded in circumstances where the
remedy of damages for breach of contract was inadequate.

6. Earlier decisions of this court relied on by the respondents as constituting binding
precedent precluding this court from holding that Blake applies to non-proprietary torts
6.1 Stoke-on-Trent Council v Wass
71.
In this case, the council had a statutory right to licence markets in a particular
area, which may well have been a property right by way of incorporeal
hereditament. Be that as it may, in pursuance of this right it had licensed markets
on Wednesdays, Fridays and Saturdays. The defendant operated an unauthorised
market on Thursdays within the area for which the council had a monopoly. At
trial, the council obtained an injunction against the holding of an unauthorised
market. The judge found as a fact that the council suffered no loss as a result of
the holding of the unauthorised market. However, he made an award of user
damages, that is, an award of damages calculated by reference to the licence fee
that the council could reasonably have required for the operation of the
defendant’s market. The question on appeal was whether the council was entitled
to damages. This court held that, while a person could obtain as damages a
reasonable sum for the wrongful use made of his property, no damages would be
awarded here because the council could not show that it had suffered loss by
reason of the infringement. Therefore nominal damages only were awarded.
Nourse and Nicholls LJJ both gave reasoned judgments, and the third member of
the court, Mann LJ, agreed with both judgments. Accordingly this court is bound
by the ratio of either of the reasoned judgments.

72.
At the outset of his analysis, Nourse LJ identified two general rules, the first being
the general rule that damages are compensatory. He held that user damages were
not an exception to this rule but merely went to the manner in which damages
were assessed. He held:
“The general rule is that a successful plaintiff in an action
in tort recovers damages equivalent to the loss which he has
suffered, no more and no less. If he has suffered no loss, the
most he can recover are nominal damages. A second
general rule is that where the plaintiff has suffered loss to
his property or some proprietary right, he recovers damages
equivalent to the diminution in value of the property or
right. The authorities establish that both these rules are
subject to exceptions. These must be closely examined, in
order to see whether a further exception ought to be made
in this case.
The first and best-established exception is in trespass to
land. It originated in the wayleave cases, where the
defendant
trespassed
by
carrying
coals
along
an
underground way through the plaintiff's mine. Although the
value of his land had not been diminished by the trespass,
the plaintiff recovered damages equivalent to what he
would have received if he had been paid for a wayleave: see
Martin v Porter (1839) 5 M & W 351, 151 ER 149; Jegon v
Vivian (1871) LR 6 Ch App 742; and Phillips v Homfray
Fothergill v Phillips (1871) LR 6 Ch App 770. ..
The second exception is in detinue….
The third exception is in infringement of patents: see
Meters Ltd v Metropolitan Gas Meters Ltd (1911) 28 RPC
157; Watson Laidlaw & Co Ltd v Pott Cassels and
Williamson (1914) 31 RPC 104 and General Tire and
Rubber Co v Firestone Tyre and Rubber Co Ltd [1975] 1
WLR 819. ..To these exceptions to the general rules in tort
must be added the decision of Brightman J in Wrotham
Park Estate Co v Parkside Homes Ltd [1974] 1 WLR 798…
As I understand these authorities, their broad effect is this. In cases
of trespass to land and patent infringement and in some cases of
detinue and nuisance the court will award damages in accordance
with what Nicholls LJ has aptly termed 'the user principle'. On an
analogous principle, in a case where there was a breach of a
restrictive covenant the court has, in lieu of a permanent
mandatory injunction to restore the breach, awarded damages
equivalent to the sum which the plaintiffs might reasonably have
demanded for a relaxation of the covenant. But it is only in the
last-mentioned case and in the trespass cases that damages have
been awarded in accordance with either principle without proof of
loss to the plaintiff. In all the other cases, the plaintiff having

established his loss, the real question has not been whether
substantial damages should be awarded at all, but whether they
should be assessed in accordance with the user principle or by
reference to the diminution in value of the property or right. In
other words, those other cases are exceptions to the second, but not
to the first, of the general rules stated above.” (pages 1410-4)
73.
Nourse LJ went on to hold that the award of the user damages in trespass cases
depended on the fact that the defendant’s use of the claimant’s land deprived the
claimant of any opportunity of using it himself. By contrast, holding an
unauthorised market did not deprive the council of the opportunity of holding one
itself (page 1414). Nourse LJ accepted that there might be a logical difficulty in
making a distinction between the present case, and the way- leave cases but held:
“I think that if the user principle were to be applied here there
would be an equal difficulty in distinguishing other cases of more
common occurrence, particularly in nuisance. Suppose a case
where a right to light or a right of way had been obstructed to the
profit of the servient owner but at no loss to the dominant owner. It
would be difficult, in the application of the user principle, to make
a logical distinction between such an obstruction and the
infringement of a right to hold a market. And yet the application of
that principle to such cases would not only give a right to
substantial damages where no loss had been suffered but would
revolutionise the tort of nuisance by making it unnecessary to
prove loss. Moreover, if the principle were to be applied in
nuisance, why not in other torts where the defendant's wrong can
work to his own profit, for example in defamation? As progenitors
of the rule in trespass and some other areas, the wayleave cases
have done good service. But just as their genus is peculiar, so
ought their procreative powers to be exhausted.
These considerations have led me to conclude that the user
principle ought not to be applied to the infringement of a right to
hold a market where no loss has been suffered by the market
owner. If loss caused by the diversion of custom from one market
to the other had been proved, I would have agreed with Nicholls LJ
that the general rule ought to apply, so that the council would have
recovered damages equivalent to the diminution in value of its
right through the loss of stallage, tolls and so forth. But I rest my
decision in this case on the simple ground that where no loss has
been suffered no substantial damages of any kind can be
recovered. Otherwise we would have to allow that the right to
recover nominal damages for disturbance of a same-day market
without proof of loss had become one to receive substantial
damages on top. If we had to allow that, why not also in the case of
another-day market where no loss had been proved? It is possible
that the English law of tort, more especially of the so-called
'proprietary torts', will in due course make a more deliberate move
towards recovery based not on loss suffered by the plaintiff but on
the unjust enrichment of the defendant: see Goff and Jones The

Law of Restitution (3rd edn, 1986) pp 612–614. But I do not think
that that process can begin in this case and I doubt whether it can
begin at all at this level of decision.” (page 1415)

74.
The ratio of the judgment of Nourse LJ, with which Mann LJ agreed, is therefore
that the user principle ought not to be applied to the infringement of a right to hold
a market where no loss had been suffered by the market owner. He would,
however, have awarded some loss of custom if some loss had been shown. In so
far as Nourse LJ held that the trespass and other exceptions were not exceptions to
the general rule that damages in tort are compensatory, it is necessary to bear in
mind that in Blake Lord Nicholls considered that, when no loss was suffered but a
right was invaded, the award of damages was probably best regarded as an
exception to the general rule. He cited Ministry of Defence v Ashman, which was
not cited in Wass or Halifax. In that case Hoffmann LJ held that a claim to
recover damages for trespass on the basis of the value of the benefit conferred on
the occupier was a restitutionary claim. He added:
“It is true that in the earlier cases it has not been expressly
stated that a claim for mesne profit for trespass can be a
claim for restitution. Nowadays I do not see why we should
not call a spade a spade. In this case the Ministry of
Defence elected for the restitutionary remedy.”

75.
Indeed, damages were awarded in Livingstone itself even though the appellant
could not have worked the coal himself.
76.
Nourse LJ regarded the underlying rule as a general rule only. It was not an
absolute rule, but the exceptions to it are those that he specifies. It is of course
necessary to read the analysis of the law through the lens of Blake. Nourse LJ
expressly foreshadows the development of the law of restitution in his concluding
remarks. It is a feature of the reasoning in Blake, which was described by this
court in Hendrix as marking “a new start in this area of law”, that it does not
analyse the law in terms of rules and exceptions but in terms of principles, whose
substance has to be applied. Nourse LJ’s concerns about revolutionising the law
of tort are moreover taken into account to some extent at least by Lord Nicholls in
Blake, in that the remedy of an account of profits is only to be awarded in
exceptional cases where justice would not otherwise be done. Nonetheless, it was
an essential part of Nourse LJ’s reasoning that damages by reference to the benefit
obtained by the defendant could only be awarded in those limited situations, and it
would in my judgment have to be shown that his circumscription of the cases
where damages were not assessed on a purely compensatory basis could not stand
with Blake (see Young v Bristol Aeroplane Co Ltd [1944] KB 718 at 729). I do
not consider that this can be shown. Blake does not discuss non-proprietary torts.
In my judgment, while an extension of Blake to non-proprietary torts on the same
basis would be likely to be consistent with Blake, and notwithstanding that, in
Hendrix, Blake was applied to a breach of contract which did not involve a
proprietary right, it cannot be said that a case that holds that damages assessed on

a purely compensatory basis are the only damages available for the torts other
than proprietary torts is necessarily overruled.
77.
In Wass, Nicholls LJ held:
“It is an established principle concerning the assessment of
damages that a person who has wrongfully used another's
property without causing the latter any pecuniary loss may
still be liable to that other for more than nominal damages.
In general, he is liable to pay, as damages, a reasonable sum
for the wrongful use he has made of the other's property.
The law has reached this conclusion by giving to the
concept of loss or damage in such a case a wider meaning
than merely financial loss calculated by comparing the
property owner's financial position after the wrongdoing
with what it would have been had the wrongdoing never
occurred. Furthermore, in such a case it is no answer for the
wrongdoer to show that the property owner would probably
not have used the property himself had the wrongdoer not
done so. In Mediana (owners) v Comet (owners), The
Mediana [1900 AC 110 at 117, [1900–3] All ER Rep 126 at
129 the Earl of Halsbury LC made the famous observation
that a defendant who had deprived the plaintiff of one of the
chairs in his room for 12 months could not diminish the
damages by showing that the plaintiff did not usually sit on
that chair or that there were plenty of other chairs in the
room.”

78.
He continued:
“The common law, however, is constantly being developed
and adapted as social conditions change, and novelty by
itself is not an answer to the present claim. Indeed, for some
time I was attracted by the analogy between infringement of
a patent and infringement of a market right. The argument
is to the following effect. The owner of a market right has a
legal monopoly in respect of the holding of a market within
a certain area. If, for the purpose of assessment of damages
on the user principle, infringement of a patent is to be
regarded as the invasion and abstraction by the infringer of
the property which consists of the monopoly of the patented
articles granted to the patentee, as Lord Shaw observed in
the passage I have cited from the Watson Laidlaw case, so
also is the disturbance of a market right to be regarded as
the invasion and abstraction of the property which consists
of the monopoly of the holding of a market in the place in
question. In other words, if the infringement of a patent is
to be regarded as the wrongful user of the property
comprised in the patent, then by parity of reasoning the

disturbance of a market right may properly be regarded as
the wrongful user of the property comprised in the market
right. If, in the one instance, damages may be awarded on
the user principle in a suitable case, so may they be in the
other instance.
I have, however, concluded that the analogy is unsound and that
the application of the user principle in the case of the disturbance
of a market right would not accord with the basic principles
applicable to that cause of action. A market right confers a
monopoly, as does a patent, but the protection which the law
affords to the owner of a market right is limited to protecting him
against being disturbed in the enjoyment of his right. If an
unauthorised market is held without disturbing the lawful market,
the owner of the lawful market has no remedy, either for damages
or otherwise. In such an event there is no place for an award of
damages to be assessed on the user principle. Thus, for example, if
and so long as the owner of the market right is currently not
exercising or seeking to exercise his right, and is not holding a
market at all, he has no cause of action against a person holding an
unauthorised market, for in such a case he is not being disturbed in
the enjoyment of his market right (cf Channell B in Dorchester
Corp v Ensor (1869) LR 4 Exch 335 at 339, where a market was
not being held on one of the material days).”

79.
In my judgment, Nicholls LJ also decided this case on the basis that there was no
loss. However, his reasoning is different. More precisely, he considered there was
no disturbance in the enjoyment of the market right: in the absence of such a
disturbance causing loss this would not be an appropriate case for the grant of an
award of damages on the user basis. He did not hold that user damages were only
available where a right of property was infringed: in any event in this context he
held that “novelty by itself is not an answer” (page 1418). Nicholls LJ made it
clear in his final paragraph (which I have not set out) that he was not deciding in
which torts user damages were available and which they were not.
80.
I disagree with the judge’s observation that “it would be odd if [Lord Nicholls]
had undergone a Damascene conversion about the availability of restitutionary
awards across the board in tort cases and yet had not referred to his earlier
judgment” ([106], quoted above). The availability of a restitutionary award for a
non-proprietary tort as such was not in issue in Blake on Nicholls LJ’s approach.
81.
In the recent case of Forsyth-Grant v Allen (which was decided after the judgment
of the judge), this court declined to award an account of profits against a
defendant who was found liable in nuisance. The lead judgment was that of
Patten J, with whom Mummery LJ agreed. Patten J refers to Blake and to Wass.
He held that Wass had “limited” the possibility of an award of damages on a
restitutionary basis (see [19]), meaning, as I read his judgment, that no such award
would be made if no loss were shown. He went on to hold:

“32. An actionable nuisance does not involve the
misappropriation of the claimant's rights in the same way,
even as in a case of trespass, let alone as in a case of
conversion or copyright or trademark infringement. The
essence of the tort is that the claimant's rights to the
reasonable enjoyment of her property have been infringed
by the use which the defendant makes of his own land. On
the face of it, this should not entitle the claimant, in my
judgment, to more than compensation for the loss which she
has actually suffered; but the highest that it could be put on
the authorities is that the claimant can, in appropriate cases,
obtain an award calculated by reference to the price, which
the defendant might reasonably be required to pay for a
relaxation of the claimant's rights so as to avoid an
injunction. This, as already explained, falls a long way short
of being awarded the whole profit for the development,
which is far in excess and completely unrelated to the
measure of loss suffered by the claimant.
33. Mr Ley referred us to a passage in Lord Keith's speech in A-G
v Guardian Newspapers Ltd [1990] 1 AC 109, [1988] 3 WLR 776,
but that was also an action for breach of confidence where equity
has always asserted a jurisdiction to order an account of profits; it
is not authority for the making of such an order in a case of
nuisance. It seems to me that the judge would have been entitled to
reject the claim for an account of profits outright, simply on the
basis that it was not an available remedy in an action for nuisance;
but even if that is wrong, his acceptance that one needs to show
exceptional circumstances is not, in my judgment, open to
criticism.”

82.
In my judgment Patten J did not rule out the possibility of a claim for user
damages, and thus a claim for restitutionary damages, for nuisance but recognised
that it might be made, though on a more limited basis than a full account of profits
in equity. In the particular case, the claim was extravagant (nothing in Blake deals
with the question of remoteness or mitigation). In any event the judge’s
assessment of the situation as not exceptional ruled out any possibility of an
account of profits on the facts of the case. In his judgment concurring in the
result, Toulson LJ left open the question whether a restitutionary claim might be
available for a claim in nuisance. In summary, I do not consider that Forsyth-
Grant takes the matter further than Wass.
6.2 Halifax Building Society v Thomas
83.
In this case, the first defendant had fraudulently obtained a mortgage from the
appellant. The mortgage was enforced by sale and there was a surplus after
repayment of the mortgage debt. The first defendant was convicted of conspiracy
to obtain mortgage advances by deception. The court also made a confiscation
order against him. The question was whether the building society could claim the
surplus. The claim was rejected. The building society had elected to affirm the

mortgage, and it had obtained repayment of all the sums due to it. This court held
that the building society had no restitutionary claim against the first defendant.
His unjust enrichment could not be treated as having been gained at the expense of
the building society.
84.
Peter Gibson LJ held:
“Attractively though Mr. Waters has argued the point, I
remain wholly unpersuaded that in the circumstances of the
present case the law should accord a restitutionary remedy
to a secured creditor who has elected not to avoid the
mortgage but to affirm it and has received full satisfaction
thereunder. To my mind there is an inconsistency between a
person being such a creditor and yet claiming more than
that to which he is contractually entitled and which he has
already fully recovered. Once the creditor has so elected
and recovered in full, I do not see why the law should come
to his aid to allow him to make a further claim. In re
Simms; Ex parte Trustee [1934] Ch. 1 this court refused to
allow a trustee in bankruptcy, who had elected to treat a
receiver as a tortfeasor for converting to his own use the
chattels of a bankrupt, to recover the profits made by the
receiver as money had and received. The authority of that
case is weakened by the reliance by this court on the now
exploded implied promise theory, but I note that it is still
cited in textbooks: see, for example, Chitty on Contracts,
27th ed. (1994), vol. 1, p. 1437, para. 29-052) and it serves
to illustrate that not every action for an account of profits
from a wrongdoer, even where there has been use of the
plaintiff's property, will be allowed, and that it may be
barred when there has been an election for another remedy.
Further I am not satisfied that in the circumstances of the
present case it would be right to treat the unjust enrichment
of Mr. Thomas as having been gained "at the expense of"
the society, even allowing for the possibility of an extended
meaning for those words to apply to cases of non-
subtractive restitution for a wrong. There is no decided
authority that comes anywhere near to covering the present
circumstances. I do not overlook the fact that the policy of
law is to view with disfavour a wrongdoer benefiting from
his wrong, the more so when the wrong amounts to fraud,
but it cannot be suggested that there is a universally
applicable principle that in every case there will be
restitution of benefit from a wrong. As Professor Birks says
(An Introduction to the Law of Restitution, p. 24): "there are
some circumstances in which enrichment by wrongdoing
has to be given up. That is, the wrong itself is not always in
itself a sufficient factor to call for restitution." On the facts
of the present case, in my judgment, the fraud is not in itself

a sufficient factor to allow the society to require Mr.
Thomas to account to it.” (pages 227-8)
85.
Glidewell LJ held:
“In order to succeed in this appeal, Mr. Waters is required
to establish that the second proposition is correct, and that
English law provides a mechanism by which it can be given
effect. Despite his able argument, I cannot discern that there
is any such general established principle. Indeed, Mr.
Waters has to concede that there is no English authority
upon which he can rely to establish his right to succeed
either in the law of restitution, under the head of unjust
enrichment, or in the law of constructive trusts. The sole
American decision which appears to be directly in point,
that of the U.S. District Court for the Southern District of
New York in Federal Sugar Refining Co. v. United States
Sugar Equalization Board (1920) 268 F. 575, is not
sufficiently persuasive to secure a visa for admission into
English jurisprudence. Like Judge Maddocks, in the
passage from his judgment quoted by Peter Gibson L.J., I
cannot conclude that the principle for which Mr. Waters
contends is at present established as part of our law.” (pages
229-30)

86.
The judge treated Halifax as an authority which precluded him from holding that a
restitutionary award could be made in an action for breach of statutory duty for the
reasons given in [106] set out above. In Halifax, the claimant had received
repayment of all that was due to it. There was therefore no need for a
restitutionary award, and such an award would have been inappropriate. This case
does not decide that a restitutionary award cannot be made in a non-proprietary
tort claim, but it does prevent Devenish from claiming the profits made by the
respondents merely on the basis that they made their profits through violations of
competition law.

7. The second sub-issue: would a restitutionary remedy be available in the
circumstances of this case? In particular, was the judge correct to hold that a
restitutionary remedy would not be available because compensatory damages would have
been adequate?
87.
This issue and the third sub-issue only arise if I am wrong on my conclusions thus
far about Wass, and also Blake applies to non-proprietary torts, but as these issues
were argued I will express some provisional conclusions on them.
88.
As I have said, the theme of Lord Nicholls’ speech in Blake is to ensure, so far as
appropriate, that the same remedies are available in the same circumstances for
different wrongs. It follows therefore that any account of profits should be

available for a non-proprietary tort only in exceptional circumstances of the kind
referred to in Blake.
89.
I have already explained that in my judgment there was a combination of factors
which enabled Blake to fulfil the criterion of being an exceptional case to justify
an account of profits. The facts were of course very different. In that case, the
Attorney General sued in the public interest for harm done to the community at
large. It was not a mere breach of contract or tort committed in a commercial
setting. However, Hendrix makes it clear that claims are not limited to claims
brought by the Attorney General in the public interest, and can include claims
arising from a commercial situation. So far as the conduct of the respondents is
concerned, Devenish’s case is that the respondents acted cynically in deliberate
breach of competition law. The House in Blake did not determine whether the
defendant’s conduct had to be in deliberate breach of duty. On the facts of this
case I do not have to decide whether that factor is always required. As Devenish
points out, under the 2001 decision the Commission found that the respondents'
conduct was so serious an abuse of competition rules that the respondents incurred
very substantial fines. Some of them were increased on account of aggravated
circumstances. Thus, having fixed the basic fines and increased them by 100% in
the case of three of the respondents, the Commission further increased the fines on
two respondents, stating:
“717. Both major European producers effectively formed a
common front in conceiving and implementing the
collusive arrangements with the Japanese and other
European producers. Roche set out to implement a strategic
plan to dominate and control the world market for all the
vitamin products it produced, which constituted a very
substantial part of all commercially available vitamins.
Roche, in combination with BASF, set out to eliminate all
effective competition between them in the Community and
EEA across almost the whole range of important
vitamins(81). Roche's particular role as prime mover and
main beneficiary of these collusive arrangements is to be
noted.

718. This aggravating circumstance justifies an increase of 50 % in
the basic amount of the fines to be imposed on Roche and an
increase of 35 % in the basic amount of the fines to be imposed on
BASF for their infringements affecting the vitamin A, E, B2, B5,
C, D3, beta-carotene and carotinoids markets”

90.
Although the fines for some of the parties were reduced in certain respects on
account of the leniency procedure as they had participated in the “whistle
blowing” procedure with Aventis receiving the largest basic fine reduction of
100% as it was the first “whistle blower” (2001 decision, paras 746 – 768), in my
judgment it is clear that the conduct of the respondents was sufficiently abusive to
meet any need, as part of the overall requirement for exceptional circumstances
for the purposes of Blake, to show that the defendants’ conduct was deliberate. It

was, for instance, far more serious than that of the defendant in Hendrix. It does
not necessarily follow that if exceptional circumstances were shown in this case
that they would be capable of being shown in any cartel case. The fines in this
case suggest that this case was out of the ordinary.
91.
Moreover, given the direct effect on Devenish, I consider that Devenish has a
legitimate interest in bringing these proceedings to make a claim attributable to its
dealings with the respondents. This is subject to the question of the passing-on
defence with which we are not concerned on this appeal.
92.
In the light of my provisional conclusions made about multiple claimants,
considered below, the fact that there are other potential claimants in respect of the
same cartels, whom Devenish does not represent and who are not parties to these
proceedings, does not affect my conclusion on this point.
93.
Another feature of this case, which is relevant, is that as I have already explained
there was a transfer of value by Devenish to the respondents and it is that transfer
of value for which Devenish seeks recoupment. Moreover, as Devenish points
out, that transfer of value was made in pursuance of a contractual relationship
between the parties. These features strengthen the case for an account of profits.
I do not have to decide whether they are also essential to a claim in tort for a
restitutionary award.
94.
There is strong support from the Commission and the Office of Fair Trading for
private actions to enforce remedies for breaches of competition law. The point is
well made in The Office of Fair Trading’s discussion paper, “Private actions in
competition law: effective redress for consumers and business” (recommendations
from the OFT, 26 November 2007):
“2.10 A system which incorporates effective public
enforcement and a real possibility of private actions will
increase the likelihood that anti-competitive behaviour is
detected and addressed (whether by way of a complaint to
the competition authorities, an approach to the infringing
undertaking(s), or through the issuing of legal proceedings).
A more effective private actions system would increase the
incentives of businesses to comply with competition law,
since the potential incidence and magnitude of any financial
liability to a competition authority and/or a claimant will
increase. As these financial risks increase, so does (or
should) the interest of those ultimately responsible for the
governance of the business (especially supervisory boards
and non-executive directors) or for supporting the business
(including, for example, financiers and investor groups). In
this way public enforcement and private actions are
complementary.”

95.
Other important documents are the EC Commission’s Green Paper on "Damages
Actions for Breach of EC Antitrust Rules" (COM(2005) 672 final), the OFT’s

response to that Green Paper (OFT 844) (May 2006), the Department for
Constitutional Affairs’ consultation paper "The Law of Damages" (CP 9/07) (May
2007) and the European Commission’s White Paper on Damages and
accompanying staff working paper.
96.
In its discussion paper referred to above, the OFT contemplated that in some cases
there would be a restitutionary award:
“2.11 In terms of the type of damages that may be
recoverable, it is well established that private actions
involve claims for damages that are compensatory in
nature. In certain circumstances, the courts may award
restitutionary damages, which aim to strip away some or all
of the gains made by a defendant which arise from a civil
wrong. Furthermore, exemplary damages might be
available in certain circumstances in England and Wales.
Other forms of relief, such as the equitable remedy of
accounting for profits, may also need to be considered in
some cases. It will be for the courts to determine how the
general principles for determining loss or damage in various
types of case apply to actions for infringement of
competition law.”
97.
Similar issues of policy arise in company law and environmental law. In company
law, an account of profits may be awarded against a director for misappropriation
of company property, including opportunities, but on the basis of breach of
fiduciary duty. In both company law and environmental law, the ultimate victims
(for example, small shareholders or residents of a particular area), may suffer little
or no loss personally and this removes incentives for the private enforcement of
claims. In this case, if damages are reduced by the amount of the overcharge
which Devenish was able to pass on to its customers, and that loss was passed on
to the ultimate consumer, a person who has a claim may both be unaware that he
had claim and have no claim worth pursuing.
98.
So far as the procedure for collective claims is concerned, there is experience in
the personal injuries field on which an appropriate procedure could be based (see
for example the collective action on vibration white finger against British Coal:
AB and Others v British Coal Corporation (Department of Trade and Industry)
and Others [2006] EWCA Civ 1357, after which a collective compensation
agreement, which required affected persons to submit their claims, along with
medical evidence, through authorised solicitors to be compensated on the basis of
agreed damages formula, was introduced). But there may be special difficulties in
this field due to the fact that consumers may not know that they have been victims
of cartels or be unable to prove that they made any relevant purchase or have no
incentive to bring any claim.
99.
In addition, in February 2008 the Civil Justice Council published a research paper
by Professor Rachel Mulheron entitled Reform of Collective Redress in England
and Wales: a Perspective of Need. This report further recommended proposals
that private enforcement should be developed. In it some of the difficulties of
private actions were highlighted. In particular the report describes alternative

procedures, first the current “opt-in” procedure whereby claimants have to join an
ongoing representative claim within a given period, and, in the alternative, a new
“opt-out” procedure whereby a claim is brought by representative action on the
premise that all affected parties are parties to it. At Chapter 9, Part F the problem
of the “passing-on” defence is summarised as:
“Interaction with the substantive law. The paucity of
follow-on actions for anti-competitive infringements in
England, when compared with the number of infringement
decisions given by the OFT and by the EC, is noteworthy.
However, one substantive law reason for the difficulty in
bringing such actions, which must be remarked upon in the
context of this Section, is the potential availability of the
passing-on defence. This defence, where available, is a
significant substantive law barrier to any party in the supply
chain from bringing a follow-on action”

100.
Mr Vajda in his reply referred to the collective action for the enforcement of
violations of competition law. For example, after an investigation the OFT fined
JJB Sports for overcharging on England and Manchester United football shirts in
2000 and 2001. Following this ruling the Consumers Association also brought an
action on behalf of the overcharged consumers, The Consumers Association v JJB
Sports PLC Case Number: 1078/7/9/07. In a settlement agreed between the
parties, approved by the Competition Appeal Tribunal by an order of Lord
Carlisle of Berriew QC dated 14 January 2008, JJB Sports agreed to compensate
directly any customers who were parties to the action with £20. Other affected
customers who were not parties to the Consumers Association’s action could, on
production of the relevant replica shirt, reclaim either £10 if the label was still
intact or £5 if it was not. These customers were required to have their replica
shirts indelibly marked and sign a document waiving the right to further legal
action against JJB Sports.
101.
Devenish makes the point that, if the pursuit of collective enforcement actions is
too difficult, especially in the English legal system with its high costs and risks,
private enforcement will not happen. It submits that the playing field is far from
level when victims of cartels, typically small and medium-sized enterprises, face
large multinational companies. Devenish submits that, by adopting a gains-based
approach, rather than a loss-based approach, the focus would shift from the
victims to the perpetrators, which is where in its submission the focus should be.
102.
The objective of deterrence is important, and is one of the reasons why the law
imposes on fiduciaries a strict duty to account: see, for example, per Lord Eldon
LC in Caffrey v Darby (1801) 6 Ves 488; 31 ER 1159. When faced with a choice,
the court may have regard to the desirability within limits of deterrence. (It is also
recognised as a legitimate factor in the decisions of the Court of Justice referred to
below). However, it is not particularly helpful in this case, because if it were a
relevant factor it would apply to every breach of competition law. So to hold
would go outside what was decided in Blake. The court would also have to bear in

mind that the Commission had imposed fines on the respondents (so as to avoid
the risk of double jeopardy for the respondents) and indeed that in its 2001
decision the Commission had increased the fines by 100% on three of the
respondents (BASF, Roche and Aventis) because in its view deterrence was
needed. Mr de la Mare argues that the court should also take into account that
there is a detailed regulatory system for competition law but, while it is not
necessary to reach a final view on this point, it is difficult to see how that could of
itself justify ruling that the circumstances were not exceptional. The court is more
likely to want to consider the way in which the regulatory system was operated. If
the existence of a detailed regulatory system were an answer to a claim for a
restitutionary award, it might be said that logically there should be no private
rights of action by victims of cartels for recompense of any kind.
103.
Moreover, it is clear from the various documents referred to above that the
availability or otherwise of an account of profits is a matter for the courts.
104.
But the fundamental difficulty in this case is that an account of profits is available
only where it is necessary to do justice in the case. Accordingly, I agree with the
judge that it is not an appropriate remedy in principle where damages are an
adequate remedy (see the judge’s judgment at [112]). I reject Devenish’s
submission that a claimant has a choice whether to seek compensatory damages or
a restitutionary award and that an election need not be made until judgment or in
some cases even satisfaction of the judgment.
105.
On this point, the principal claim made by Devenish is for the overcharge. This
point was confirmed in a document submitted after the hearing pursuant to the
court's request.
106.
The judge drew a distinction between claims for damages, which are unavailable
on the facts, and claims for damages which could not be proved for evidential
reasons (see eg [81]). He held this case fell in the latter description and that
damages could not be said to be inadequate. The judge's distinction is useful, but
I would not go so far as to say that damages could never be inadequate if the
difficulty was one of proof: in my judgment it is at least arguable that the court
should order an account of profits where the evidential difficulties were not the
claimant’s responsibility.
107.
However, that is not this case. In his report dated 23 February 2006, Dr
Veljanovski has given his estimate of the overcharge for three vitamins for 1998.
He has had to make certain assumptions but the reasonableness of these
assumptions will no doubt be a matter of proof. Mr Vajda has not referred us to
any particular insuperable difficulties of proof. I note that Dr Veljanovski has not
been able to make an estimate of the overcharge for certain vitamins "either due to
insufficient price data or initial evidence the cartel was not able to effectively raise
prices". It has not been suggested that the necessary price data would not be
available on disclosure, and there would of course be no overcharge if the cartel
had not been able to raise prices. Dr Veljanowski does not appear to support the
proposition that the fact that the cartels were secret has made it exceptionally
difficult or impossible for Devenish to prove its claim.

108.
Although the assumed facts do not include the passing-on defence that is yet to be
adjudicated upon, Devenish submits that it faces extreme difficulties of causation
and loss if a passing-on defence lies. The first skeleton argument states:
 "Given the passage of time and difficulties of proof which
Devenish faces in relation to the sales and purchases which
it has made, it is faced with a real prospect that it may not
be able to prove its losses in the face of an attack by the
defendant to the effect that it must have passed on its losses
to its customers, or failed, as a matter of law, to prove that it
has mitigated its losses by passing them on.” (para. 95).
109.
 It is on that basis that Devenish submits that the award of compensatory damages
would be inadequate. It relies on the fact that the cartels were secret. However,
the report of Dr Veljanovski filed on behalf of another claimant in these
proceedings (Moy Park) suggests that direct purchases from BASF, which would
include Devenish, passed on 100% of the overcharge to indirect purchasers. It
would not be just to give Devenish a restitutionary award to enable it to avoid the
consequences of its having passed on the overcharge.
110.
Devenish also alleges that the effect of the breaches of art 81 has been to inhibit
the development of its business so as to make it unable to compete with members
of the cartel. This has been referred to as “the margin squeeze” claim. It was a
first raised in a reply to a request for information served in February 2006 and it
receives a little mention in the main skeleton argument in support of the appeal.
In theory, the situation might not be far removed from the position of the Crown
in Blake if the respondents, in carrying on the cartels, have destroyed or made in
practice impossible to find the evidence which would show the effect or extent of
the cartels. However, that is not the way the case appears to be put. What appears
to be said on this aspect of the case is that there are considerable difficulties of
proof: see, for example, [91] of the appellants' main skeleton argument in support
of this appeal. The court is accustomed to dealing with those difficulties " by the
exercise of a sound imagination and the practice of the broad axe" (see per Lord
Shaw in Watson, Laidlaw v Pott, Cassells and Williamson). Accordingly the fact
that damages will be very difficult to prove is not in my judgment enough to
justify a gains-based remedy, and the margin squeeze claim, which was not
developed in oral argument in any great detail, cannot therefore lead to such a
remedy.
111.
Lord Nicholls considered that a restitutionary award could be made whenever the
justice of the case requires it. He suggested as a general test the test whether the
claimant has a legitimate interest in stripping the defendant of its profits. This test
is not in my judgment met in, for instance, a case where a claim was incapable of
clear proof because the claimant had not maintained effective records. The justice
of the case must also relate to the measurement of the remedy. It is not enough
that the claimant fails to prove his loss on conventional grounds (see Wass,
above). Nor, in my judgment, is it enough to show that, because of the passing-on
defence, Devenish could not prove that it was entitled to any compensation.
112.
These conclusions make it unnecessary for me to consider the further submission
by Mr de la Mare that a restitutionary award would be penal in nature and

therefore offend the Community law principle of non bis in idem. I would,
however, add that in my judgment it would be relevant to consider, in determining
whether it was just to order an account of profits in the circumstances of this case,
whether on its true interpretation the fines imposed by the 2001 decision had
already required the respondents to account for their profits obtained as a result of
the cartel. We did not hear detailed argument on the way in which the fines were
calculated, and I would therefore leave open the question of the effect of the 2001
decision on this point. Taking the case of Roche and vitamin A as an example, the
basic amount of the fine (before any increase for aggravating circumstances)
appears on the face of it to have been fixed by reference to Roche's relative
importance in the market for that vitamin and increased by 100% and then 90% to
achieve sufficient deterrence and to take account of the duration of the
infringements respectively, rather than by reference to the profits which Roche
made.

8. (third sub-issue) multiple claimants
113.
The judge was concerned that there might be insuperable procedural objections to
making a restitutionary award in this case. He referred to the existence of
multiple claimants.
114.
It is unnecessary to express a final conclusion on this point but provisionally it
seems to me that, if there were a possibility of conflicting claims by multiple
claimants, the court should consider whether case management directions could
deal with that problem. Such directions might afford a possible solution in this
case if the passing on defence were also to apply to a claim for an account of
profits (compare Aggravated Exemplary and Restitutionary Damages (1997) (Law
Comm No 247) at para 3.80). The judge thought it was unfair that some claimants
might seek restitutionary awards and others compensatory damages. I do not
consider that this is of itself necessarily unfair or likely to lead to difficulties if in
each case the award can be limited to each potential claimant’s own loss. In those
limited circumstances, in my judgment, Devenish is right to say that the claimant
should not be denied a remedy it would otherwise have because of the possibility
that the other claimants might be awarded different remedies. That possibility
could occur now in cases where restitutionary awards can already be made.
115.
I have expressed these provisional conclusions on the basis that the passing on
defence would apply to a claim for an account of profits as it does to a claim for
damages. Devenish, however, does not accept that this would be the case and that
issue does not fall to be determined on this appeal.
116.
On a separate point, it would not in my judgment be unfair if a single claimant
sought different remedies against different respondents. Moreover, the risk of
inconsistent factual determinations exists in any event and thus even if only
compensatory damages are available.

(B) COMMUNITY LAW
117.
The two questions of Community law argued in this court were not the subject of
decision by the judge.
118.
The background principles are common ground. Since Community law regulates
competition, English law must provide remedies for breach to persons injured
thereby. This follows from Courage v Crehan [2001] 1 ECR 1-6297. This case
concerned the question whether English law was required to disapply the rule of
English law that a party to an unlawful contract could not himself claim damages
for its breach and provide a remedy in damages to a person if he was able to show
a breach of art 85 in relation to a “beer tie” (whereby public houses were obliged
to buy beer from their tied breweries at higher prices than independent public
houses). The Court of Justice held:
 “Any individual can rely on a breach of Article 85(1) of the
Treaty before a national court even where he is a party to a
contract that is liable to restrict or distort competition
within the meaning of that provision.” ([24])
119.
The Court of Justice also held:
 “The full effectiveness of Article 85 of the Treaty and, in
particular, the practical effect of the prohibition laid down
in Article 85(1) would be put at risk if it were not open to
any individual to claim damages for loss caused to him by a
contract or by conduct liable to restrict or distort
competition.” ([26])
120.
However, the methods for the effective enforcement of this private action would
be matter for national courts, subject to the proviso that:

“…such rules are not less favourable than those governing
similar domestic actions (principle of equivalence) and that
they do not render practically impossible or excessively
difficult the exercise of rights conferred by Community law
(principle of effectiveness) (see Case C-261/95 Palmisani
[1997] ECR I-4025, paragraph 27).” ([29]).
121.
The Court of Justice continued:
“In that regard, the Court has held that Community law
does not prevent national courts from taking steps to ensure
that the protection of the rights guaranteed by Community
law does not entail the unjust enrichment of those who
enjoy them… Similarly, provided that the principles of
equivalence and effectiveness respected… Community law
does not preclude national law from denying a party, who is
found to bear significant responsibility for the distortion of
competition the right to obtain damages from the other

contracting party. Under a principle which is recognized in
most of the legal systems of the member states and which
the court has applied in the past… a litigant should not
profit from his own unlawful conduct, where this is
proven.” ([30]-[31])

122.
Contrary, however, to the submission of Mr Vajda, I do not read the final sentence
that I have quoted as holding that it is a generally accepted principle of law in the
member states that a gains-based remedy should be granted. We have no
information as to whether such remedies are normally given in any of the member
states. (As to the position in France, however, see generally: P. Arhel, Practiques
anticoncurrentielles (injonctions et sanctions), 2003
Dalloz
Répertoire
Commercial).

123.
The first issue is whether Community law prevents a restitutionary award. Mr de
la Mare submits that to make a restitutionary award in order to deter further
breaches of competition law would run counter to the 2001 decision contrary to
art 16 of the Modernisation Regulation. Art 16 of the Modernisation Regulation
provides:
“where national courts rule on agreements… under article
81… they cannot take decisions running counter to the
decision adopted by the Commission. ”

124.
Mr Vajda’s response is that a restitutionary award would not be penal. It would
simply require the respondents to account for some or all of the profits they had
actually made (see My Kinda Town v Soll [1982] FSR 147 at 156 (reversed on
liability by this court [1983] RPC 407). He further submits that art 16 is not
involved because there is no operative part of the Commission decision dealing
with private remedies. Art 16 merely codifies the principles in Masterfoods Ltd v
HB Ice cream Ltd [2000] ECR –11369.
125.
Masterfoods concerned an exclusivity agreement whereby a fridge supplied by
HB Ice Cream at a nominal rent could only be used for the storage of HB Ice
Cream products and not those of its rival, Masterfoods. HB Ice Cream
successfully defended a claim by Masterfoods in the Irish courts that its
exclusivity contract was in breach of arts 85 and 86. However, HB Ice Cream’s
claim for damages was dismissed. The Commission ruled that the provision of
freezer units for no or a nominal rent was in breach of art 86. The Court of Justice
held:

 “52. It is even more important that when national courts
rule on agreements or practices which are already the
subject of a Commission decision they cannot take

decisions running counter to that of the Commission, even
if the latter's decision conflicts with a decision given by a
national court of first instance.”

126.
In any event, he submits that the argument of Mr de la Mare is contrary to
Manfredi v Lloyd Adriatico Assuricazione [2006] ECR 1-6619. In this case,
certain insurance companies had unlawfully agreed to increase premiums.
Advocate General Geelhoed, in his opinion, said that the principles in Courage v
Crehan should apply to a breach of art 81, and that private enforcement and public
enforcement co-existed. As regards compensatory damages, and damages which
went further than providing compensation, he said:
“70. Ensuring the useful effect of article 81(1) EC does not,
to my mind, necessitate the award of compensation greater
than the harm suffered. On the other hand, where special
forms of damages can be awarded under national
competition law, they must also be available if the claims
concerned are based on an infringement of Community
competition law.”

127.
The Court of Justice applied the principles in Courage v Crehan. Therefore, in
the absence of Community rules governing the matter, it was for the domestic
legal system of each member state to prescribe the detailed rules governing the
exercise of the individual's right of action, including limitation periods, principles
of causation and procedural rules, provided that the principles of equivalence and
effectiveness were observed. (I would here note a further submission by Mr de la
Mare that in the absence of Community rules domestic law could also determine
whether a passing-on defence lay: Case 6/79 Just v Ministry for Fiscal Affairs
[1980] ECR 501).
128.
 In Manfredi, the Court of Justice also held that the question whether an award of
punitive damages “greater than the advantage obtained by the offending operator”
should be made was one for the national courts:

“89. In accordance with settled case-law, the national
courts whose task it is to apply the provisions of
Community law in areas within their jurisdiction must
ensure that those rules take full effect and must protect the
rights which they confer on individuals…
91. Indeed, the existence of such a right strengthens the
working of the Community competition rules and
discourages agreements or practices, frequently covert,
which are liable to restrict or distort competition. From that
point of view, actions the damages before the national

courts can make a significant contribution to the
maintenance of effective competition in the Community…
92. As to the award of damages and the possibility of an
award of punitive damages, in the absence of Community
rules governing the matter, it is for the domestic legal
system of each Member State to set the criteria for
determining the extent of the damages, provided that the
principles of equivalence and effectiveness are observed.

93. In that respect, first, in accordance with the principle of
equivalence, it must be possible to award particular
damages, such as exemplary or punitive damages, pursuant
to actions founded on the Community competition rules, if
such damages may be awarded pursuant to similar actions
founded on domestic law (see, to that effect, Brasserie du
pêcheur and Factortame, cited above, paragraph 90).

94. However, it is settled case-law that Community law
does not prevent national courts from taking steps to ensure
that the protection of the rights guaranteed by Community
law does not entail the unjust enrichment of those who
enjoy them (see, in particular, Case 238/78 Ireks-Arkady v
Council and Commission [1979] ECR 2955, paragraph 14,
Joined Cases C-441/98 and C-442/98 Michaïlidis [2000]
ECR I-7145, paragraph 31, and Courage v Crehan, cited
above, paragraph 30).

95. Secondly, it follows from the principle of effectiveness
and the right of any individual to seek compensation for
loss caused by a contract or by conduct liable to restrict or
distort competition that injured persons must be able to seek
compensation not only for actual loss (damnum emergens)
but also for loss of profit (lucrum cessans) plus interest.”

129.
Mr Vajda submits that the Court of Justice in Manfredi accepted that there could
be private enforcement and that it must have contemplated the possibility of a
restitutionary award. Moreover, he relies on the Commission Staff Working paper
which has similarly interpreted the Manfredi decision by accepting that punitive
damages are permitted by it. Mr Vajda also relies on case law regarding unlawful
charges, such as Test Claimants in the FII Group Litigation v IRC C-446-04, but
this line of authority is not helpful given the jurisprudence under art 81 itself.
130.
In my judgment, Community law does not prevent the making of a restitutionary
award. I have already indicated that, if it were open to the Court to make such an
award, it would be awarded only in exceptional circumstances that would not

include the case such as this where a claimant in the position of Devenish (on the
assumed facts) would in an appropriate case be able to prove its loss on
conventional principles. There is no relevantly exceptional difficulty in this case
in doing so. It is, therefore, unnecessary to go further into this Community law
question for the purposes of this case. Provisionally, however, it seems to me that,
if the award were permitted by domestic law to enable Devenish to recover profits
made by the respondents where it had failed to show any harm, it would in my
judgment be no more extensive a remedy than the punitive damages considered in
Manfredi. If the award were in those circumstances available in domestic law, the
principle of equivalence would apply. Since, if Blake applies, a restitutionary
award could only be made in exceptional circumstances where the justice of the
case required it, I do not consider that there is likely to arise any question of such
an award offending the Community law principle that the claimant should not
receive unjust enrichment.
131.
In my judgment, Mr de la Mare’s argument proceeds on the mistaken basis that a
restitutionary award would require the respondents to account for profits on
transactions where the overcharge was passed on. If the passing-on defence is
available, then the profits to be accounted for would be adjusted accordingly (see
above). If the passing-on defence is not available, but the subsequent purchasers
have separate claims, issues of multiple liability arise in any event.
132.
I do not need to deal with the further argument (based on Van Colson, referred to
below, at [134]) that in considering the adequacy of remedies it uses to implement
art 81 the court must have regard to the combined effect of both the civil remedy
and the fine. I have already accepted above that the court needs to consider the
impact of the fine. I do not read the jurisprudence cited to us as establishing that
this court must refuse to grant a restitutionary remedy simply because the breach
of regulatory rules is capable of resulting in a fine.
133.
Mr de la Mare further submits that a remedy by way of a restitutionary award is
impliedly excluded by the scheme of remedies provided by domestic law. He
relies for this submission by analogy on cases such as Deutsche Morgan Grenfell
Group plc v IRC [2007] 1 AC 558. This submission requires a detailed analysis of
the domestic legislation. We were not taken to that legislation, as the submission
was not fully pursued. In the circumstances, I do not consider that I need to deal
with this submission.
134.
The second question is whether the availability of a restitutionary award is
necessary for the purposes of the effectiveness principle of Community law. Mr
Vajda relies on Case 14/83 Von Colson v Land Nordrhein-Westfalen [1984] ECR
1891. This case concerned an application for damages pursuant to rights
conferred by Directive 76/207/EEC for discrimination on the grounds of sex by a
female applicant turned down for employment which was awarded to less
qualified men. The Court of Justice held that, although the directive left member
states free to choose between the different solutions suitable for achieving its
objective if compensation for this kind of breach was awarded it must be
“adequate in relation to the damage sustained” ([23]). This compensation,
therefore, had to be more than purely nominal compensation such as, for example,
the reimbursement only of the expenses incurred in connection with the
application.

135.
Van Colson was decided in a completely different context. Even so, it is clear that
the remedy under national law need be no more than “adequate in relation to the
damage sustained”. (Mr Hoskins cited Case 271/91 Marshall [1993] ECR 1-
4367, but that decision does not take the matter materially further for this
purpose). It is also clear from cases such as Manfredi that purely compensatory
damages are sufficient for the purposes of safeguarding the rights of private
persons under art 81. The doctrine of effectiveness is therefore directed to
ensuring sufficient remedies rather than the fullest possible remedies. An action
for compensatory damages fulfils the requirements of sufficiency. Accordingly I
would dismiss the appeal on this ground.
136.
As to the question of a reference for a preliminary ruling to the Court of Justice, I
consider that there is no doubt about the answer to the last question and moreover
I do not consider that it is appropriate to make a reference while the question of
domestic law remains subject to a further appeal. If Devenish were to appeal and
to be successful on appeal, a reference on the basis sought would have been
unnecessary.
Disposition
137.
For the reasons given above I consider that this appeal should be dismissed.
Lord Justice Longmore:
138.
Article 81 of EC Treaty prohibits cartels and in particular agreements between
companies which directly or indirectly fix purchase or selling prices. The
defendant manufacturers of vitamins operated just such a cartel and were found
out. On 21st November 2001 the EC Commission adopted a decision that
agreements made by the defendants had been in breach of Article 81 and they
were fined accordingly. Those fines were at the time the highest fines which the
Commission had ever imposed.
139.
It is the duty of Member States to provide domestic causes of action to persons
who claim to have suffered loss caused to them as a result of such agreements. In
the United Kingdom that cause of action is for breach of statutory duty, see
Sempra Metals Ltd v IRC [2008] 1 A.C. 561, 595 para. 69 per Lord Nicholls of
Birkenhead. The question that arises on this appeal is how damages for breach of
this statutory duty should be assessed.
140.
Devenish, who have carried the burden of the appeal on behalf of the claimants,
bought vitamins from the defendants either for immediate re-sale or for use in
making up other products which were then re-sold. They purchased the vitamins
at an artificially high price illegally set by the defendants. They were able,
however, to re-sell at a reasonable profit and it appears likely that they did not
themselves have to absorb that artificially high price. They fear (although it has
not yet been so decided) that a court might say that they have suffered no loss
since they have passed the artificially high price down to their sub-buyers. They
have, therefore, brought before the court, by way of preliminary issue, the
question whether they can claim from the defendants the gain which those
defendants have wrongly made. In other words they seek an account of the

surplus profit illegitimately made by the defendants and an order that that profit
should be paid to them.
141.
This novel claim was rejected by the judge who also decided that Devenish could
not recover exemplary damages. There is no appeal against that latter decision but
Devenish do continue to maintain a claim to what they have called “a
restitutionary award” but which is in reality a claim for account of profits in the
sense I have already explained. This claim requires the court to go back to first
principles.
142.
When a defendant has broken an obligation which he owes to a claimant, the
normal rule of English law is that the claimant is entitled to compensation for any
resulting loss to him. This is not an invariable rule since a claimant can
sometimes recover for someone else’s loss, although he will normally be
accountable in respect of any sum recovered to the person who has actually
suffered the loss, see the instances collected in The Albazero [1977] AC 774, 846.
143.
There are also some instances when a claimant can recover more than his loss.
The most obvious example is a case in which a claimant is entitled to exemplary
damages which are intended to penalise a defendant for tortious conduct,
particularly if he has calculated that the profit he is likely to make from his
wrongful conduct will exceed any damages for which he is likely to be liable to
the claimant within the second category of such damages identified by Lord
Devlin in Rookes v Barnard [1964] AC 1129, as further explained by the House of
Lords in Kuddus [2002] 1 AC 122. In the current state of the law, exemplary
damages are not available for breach of contract even if a contract – breaker has
made a similarly cynical calculation that it will benefit him more to break a
contract than to perform it, see The Siboen and Sibotre [1976] 1 Lloyds Rep 293.
As I have already said, the original claim for exemplary damages in this case is
not now pursued.
144.
Another category of cases in which the claimant can recover more than his loss
has been labelled “restitution for wrongs” or “a restitutionary award” and, as such,
has found its way into text-books on restitution. Such a label is understandable
because, in the cases where such damages are awarded, a defendant has
undoubtedly been unjustly enriched but the label “restitution” is perhaps liable to
mislead to the extent that it can imply the restoration to a claimant of money or
other benefits he once had but has since lost. In cases where a claimant recovers
more than he has lost he is usually depriving a defendant of a gain he has made; it
may be that the law will require such a defendant to transfer to the claimant the
gain he has made but it may perhaps be queried whether the word “restitution” is
the most apt word to describe that process. It may be for these reasons that Lord
Nicholls in AG v Blake [2001] 1 A.C. 268 at 284H described without further
explanation the phrase “restitutionary damages” as “unhappy”. He preferred to
use the expression “account of profits”. I shall do that also.
145.
The most obvious case in which an account of profits is appropriately awarded is
when a defendant has wrongfully used the claimant’s property and made a gain
from it. If a defendant has made a profit from trespassing on the claimant’s land
or interfering with his goods or his intellectual property rights, he may be required
to account to the claimant for the profit he has made from using the claimant’s

property without his permission or authorisation. Before AG v Blake it was held
in this court in Stoke-on-Trent City Council v Wass [1988] 1 WLR 1406 that such
an award was not available in a case of public nuisance when a defendant
interfered with the right of the claimant to hold a market. In the light of AG v
Blake in which the House of Lords made a declaration that the Attorney General
was entitled to be paid whatever amount was due to the notorious traitor Blake
from his publisher under the agreement for publishing his account of his
treacherous activities, I do not consider that Wass is authority for the proposition
that the categories of cause of action in which it is permissible to order an account
of profits are necessarily confined to tortious claims for breach of a proprietary
right. Lord Nicholls was able to show that an account of profits had always been
available where equitable rights (e.g. breach of confidence) had been infringed
and considered that the claim for breach of contract in Blake was closely akin to a
claim for breach of a fiduciary obligation where an account of profits was a
standard remedy, see 287F.
146.
It is sometimes said that another category of cases in which a claimant can be
awarded more than his actual loss occurs when a claimant is awarded damages for
loss of use. The best-known example is that of Lord Halsbury’s chair in The
Mediana [1900] AC 113.
“Supposing a person took away a chair out of my room and
kept it for twelve months, could anybody say you had a
right to diminish the damages by showing that I did not
usually sit in that chair or that there were plenty of other
chairs in the room?”
With a little elaboration Lord Halsbury answered that question in the negative
because one could always assess damages by reference to the amount it would
cost to hire a chair for the length of time for which the claimant had been deprived
of its use. In AG v Blake at 279E Lord Nicholls preferred to regard these cases as
“an exception to the rule” but as Mance LJ pointed out in Experience Hendrix
LLC v PPX Enterprises Inc [2003] All ER Comm 830 standard measures of
assessing loss (e.g. by reference to an available market in case of sale or hire of
goods) are not necessarily to be regarded as other than compensatory:-
“Whether the adoption of a standard measure of damages
represents a departure from a compensatory approach
depends upon what one understands by compensation and
whether the term is only apt in circumstances where an
injured party’s financial position, viewed subjectively, is
being precisely restored.”
This group of “loss of use” cases can, however, be safely put to one side on this
appeal because the claimants have made clear that their claim is confined to an
account of the profits made by the defendants and an order that all (or some) of
them be paid over to themselves.
147.
Once one has cleared the legal ground and appreciated that the claim made in the
present case is a claim that the defendants should disgorge the profit which they
have made from their breach of statutory duty in operating the cartel the

difficulties of the claim become apparent. No one suggests that, to the extent the
claimant has in fact suffered a loss because it has paid too high a price which it
has been unable (for any reason) to pass on to its own purchasers, that loss cannot
be recovered. If, however, the claimant has in fact passed the excessive price on
to its purchasers and not absorbed the excess price itself, there is no very obvious
reason why the profit made by the defendants (albeit undeserved and wrongful)
should be transferred to the claimant without the claimant being obliged to
transfer it down the line to those who have actually suffered the loss. Neither the
law of restitution nor the law of damages is in the business of transferring
monetary gains from one undeserving recipient to another undeserving recipient
even if the former has acted illegally while the latter has not.
148.
It is right to say that Devenish also wish to mount a claim for the profit which they
claim to have lost because they say that they have lost sales which they would
have made but for the excessive prices imposed by the defendants. Devenish say
with some force that, although such a claim is theoretically possible, it will be
difficult to prove. It follows, say Devenish, that damages are an inadequate
remedy and that justifies an account of the profits illegitimately made by the
defendants. The bald assertion that the fact that damages are difficult to prove
justifies a claim for account of profits cannot be accepted for many reasons which
include
i)
difficulty of proof does not necessarily mean that no damages will be
awarded;
ii)
if no or few damages are awarded, that does not mean that such damages
are inadequate; loss of a possible sale is less serious than actual out-of-
pocket loss;
iii)
the concept of damages being an inadequate remedy is a useful concept in
the field of interlocutory injunctions but is a treacherous one if it is used as
a supposedly principled reason for the disgorgement of profits made by
somebody else;
iv)
it is clear on the authorities that apart from cases of the misuse of the
claimant’s own property, an account of profits outside the established
categories is only to be made in “exceptional” cases per Lord Nicholls in
AG v Blake (no less than 3 times) at 284H, 285D and F). A traitor, seeking
to profit from his treachery by making a self-justificatory book about it, is
indeed “exceptional”. Cartels are not “exceptional” in that sense. It is
difficult to see how one cartel could be more “exceptional” than another.
If the claim were allowed in the present case, it would quickly become the
norm in all cartel cases that restitutionary awards should be made;
v)
the claim as originally formulated is an all or nothing claim. It is thus
different from the sort of award that is sometimes made in the form of the
price that the defendant would have had to pay to obtain a claimant’s
consent to do what he has done. That was possible in Wrotham Park
Estates Co v Parkside Homes Ltd [1974] 1 WLR 798 and in the
Experience Hendrix case. Here that is not an available option. To the
extent that it may be said that the claimant should be content with a

proportion of the defendants’ profits rather than all of it, it is not possible
to see a principled way in which that could be done since there is no
obvious way in which the claimant’s loss can be related to the defendants’
gain.
149.
The only real argument in favour of an order for account of profits is the argument
of policy that cartels are a notorious evil and the civil courts should in some way
provide an incentive for their eradication by making such an order. Mr Vajda QC
for Devenish made a sustained plea to this effect. But it does not seem to me to be
right for the courts to take this step on their own initiative. Towards the end of his
submissions Mr Brealey QC asked rhetorically whether a restitutionary system of
damages was something which the courts would wish to encourage. I would for
my part answer “Not in general apart from proprietary or fiduciary claims and
exceptional cases such as that of Blake”. Lord Hobhouse of Woodborough made
the same point even more eloquently than Mr Brealey in his dissenting speech in
AG v Blake at page 299D-E:-
“… if some more extensive principle of awarding non-
compensatory damages for breach of contract is to be
introduced into our commercial law the consequences will
be very far-reaching and disruptive. I do not believe that
such is the intention of your Lordships but if others are
tempted to try to extend the decision of the present
exceptional case to commercial situations so as to introduce
restitutionary rights beyond those presently recognised by
the law of restitution, such a step will require very careful
consideration before it is acceded to.”
150.
I agree with Arden LJ on all the European Community issues raised. I would
dismiss this appeal.
Lord Justice Tuckey:
151.
The facts of this case have been sufficiently set out in the judgments of Arden and
Longmore LJJ for which I am grateful. But I think I should add that at the end of
the hearing before us Devenish formulated its claim for the wrongful net profits
made by the defendants from their breach of statutory duty as follows:
For the avoidance of doubt the wrongful net profits are the
cartel-induced overcharges in selling vitamins to the
Claimant. So, for example, if a unit of vitamins would have
cost the Claimant £60 (on which the defendants lawful net
profit was £15) and, as a result of the cartel, the unit of
vitamins actually cost the claimant £100, the claimant seeks
£40 (not £55). The £40 is the “overcharge/wrongful net
profit”.
In other words Devenish is claiming the overcharge as if it were the defendants’
net profit so as to avoid having to take into account the fact (if true) that it passed
on the whole of the overcharge to its customers. I can see no way in which it

could avoid taking this “pass on” into account in any compensatory claim for
damages.
152.
Nevertheless the court has to decide whether an account of profits should be
available in a cartel case, or at least in this case. I agree with Arden and
Longmore LJJ that it should not.
153.
The questions I have considered on the way to reaching this conclusion are:
1) Does community law compel an answer one way or another?
2) Are we bound by Wass to hold that an account of profits cannot be awarded on
a claim for a non-proprietary tort?
3) Are damages an adequate remedy and is this an exceptional case?

154.
Like Arden LJ I think the answer to my first question is No. Mr Vajda’s
proposition that community law positively requires a restitutionary award was not
supported by the material upon which he relied. In Courage v Crehan (at para.
26) the ECJ held that the full effectiveness of the treaty would be put at risk if it
were not open to any individual to “claim damages for loss caused to him” by
conduct liable to restrict or distort competition. There is nothing in this case (or
Von Colson for the reasons given by Arden LJ in para. 134) which suggests that
anything more is needed to satisfy the community law requirement for
effectiveness. Indeed I understand that restitutionary remedies are not normally
available in other states of the European Union. Such remedies would only be
required here if prescribed by the principle of equivalence which is not invoked in
this case.
155.
I also reject Mr de la Mare’s submission that community law prevents a
restitutionary award. Such an award would not be a decision “running counter” to
a decision of the Commission and would not therefore breach Article 16 of the
Modernisation Regulation (see para. 122) and is contrary to what the ECJ said at
paras. 89 - 95 in Manfredi (see para. 127).
156.
My answer to the second question is that Wass is binding on us. I agree with what
Arden LJ says at para. 57 that Blake suggests that an account of profits could be
ordered for non-proprietary torts. But for the reasons she gives in para. 75 I do
not think it can be said that Wass, which was not cited in Blake, has necessarily
been overruled by it. It can stand with Blake. Non-proprietary torts do still
therefore fall to be considered as an exception to the general principles articulated
by Lord Nicholls in Blake unless and until Wass is overruled.
157.
This conclusion makes my third question academic but my answer to it is that
damages are an adequate remedy and this is not an exceptional case.
158.
Devenish’s expert has been able to calculate the amount of the overcharge using
methodology typical in anti-trust cases. In calculating Devenish’s loss he has not
taken into account any pass-on, whereas in the case of one of the other claimants,
a poultry producer further down the vitamins supply chain, he has been able to

calculate the pass-on upstream and downstream of the claimant. If Devenish has
suffered a loss it is recoverable as damages, but if it has not I do not see how this
can be a reason for saying that damages are an inadequate remedy; they are
adequate for anyone who has suffered a loss. An account of profits of the kind
advanced would give Devenish a windfall. I can see no justification for this. As
Longmore LJ says the law is not in the business of transferring monetary gains
from one undeserving recipient to another.
159.
Nor do I think that difficulty of proof means that damages are an inadequate
remedy. The overcharge has been calculated without difficulty. A claim for what
is described as “margin squeeze” was added by Devenish in further information
given a year after it launched its claim for the overcharge. It has the appearance
of an after-thought and played little or no part in argument before the judge
although, as he notes, difficulty of proof was in the forefront of Devenish’s case.
Greater emphasis was placed upon this part of the claim by Mr Vajda before us,
but like Longmore LJ I do not accept that the assertion that damages are difficult
to prove justifies the claim for account of profits for the reasons he gives in para.
147. A judge wielding the broad axe is capable of doing justice in such a case.
160.
For the same reasons and the reasons they give I agree with Arden and Longmore
LJJ that this is not an exceptional case. Although not determinative I also find
persuasive some of the reasons given by the judge and suggested in argument for
saying that an account of profits is not an appropriate remedy. The difficulties
caused by multiple claimants, (some perhaps claiming compensatory damages),
attempting to allocate profits between claimants and taking account of fines
cannot be underestimated.
161.
For these reasons I too would dismiss this appeal. Devenish is entitled to be
compensated for any loss it has suffered as a result of the cartel, no more and no
less.
