Massa
> .
~f«Mk * MiOkLffl|k&HJK£
^v^
r-'
- \,
Ro.7al Courts of Justice.
Friday. 31st January, 1969*
Appeal of plaintiff froia ^judgment of Mr, Justice Svjanwick without
a jury, dated July 24th, 196?.
Before:
TEE MASTER Off THE ROLLS (Lord Denning;),
LORD JUSTICE V/INH
and
LORD JUSTICE SACHS-
Between
HERBERT LEONARD DOYLE
and
OLBY (IRONMONGERS) LIKITED,,
CECIL AUGUSTUS OLBY,
LESLIE NORTON OLBY
and
A. OLBY & SOU LIMITED.
Plaintiff
Appellant
(/tf
(pJZ&JZOtl)
Defendants
Respondents
J U D G M E N T
-£"Vi'>-'o
-^u a^-reT^-Ci?--?

jB THE SUPBBHE COURT OP JUDICATURE,
COURT OP APPEAL u
Royal Courts of Justioe.
Friday, 31st January. 1969.
Appeal of plaintiff from judgment of Mr* Justioe Swanwlok without
A
a jury, London* dated July 24th, 196?•
Before
B
Between
THE MASTER OF TUE BOLLS (Lord Denning).
LORD JUSTICE WINN
and
LORD JUSTICE SACHS.
HERBERT LEONARD DOYLE
and
OLBY (IRONMONGERS) LIMITED,
CECIL AUGUSTUS 0L3X,
LESLIE IdORTON OLBY
and
A. OL3 & SON LIMITED
Plaintiff
Appellant
Defendants
Respondents.
D (Iransorlpt of the Shorthand Notes of The Association of Official
Shorthandwriters, Ltd., Room 392, Royal Courts of Justice, and
2, New Square, Lincoln's Inn, London, W.C. 2.)
The-Plaintiff Appellant, Mr* Doyle, appeared in person.
Mr. DAVID A.L* 3K0UT (instructed by Messrs* George and George)
appeared on behalf of the Respondent Defendants.
- J U D G M E N T -
1.

ASS*-
v THE HA3TEB OF THE BOLLS 8 Hr* Doyle in I963 was ainded to buy a
business*
Be saw an advertisement in Daltons Weekly*
He got
particulars*
The business was said to belong to A. Olby & Son
Ltd** 12 Upper High Street,, Epsos, Surrey, and the turnover
£27,000»
The price asked for the lease, the business and
A
goodwill was £4,500*
The stock was to be taken at valuation*
Mr* Doyle sade further enquiries about it.
On 6th November,
1963, Mr* Leslie Olby, a director of the ooap&ny, produced
accounts to him.
They were for the three years ending 31st
Deoeober, 1962*
In a covering letter Mr* Olby said:
"Dear
g
Mr* Doyle,
As requested we are enclosing accountant's figures
ooverini Olby (Ironmongers) Ltd*, 12 Upper High Street, Epsom,
Surrey*•
Those figures showed that for those three years there
had been considerable profits: £1,921 net pro its in I96O1
£1,7^9 in 1961, and £1,361 in 1962* Mr* Doyle also saw Mr.
C
Cecil Olby who worked on the premises. Mr. Doyle asked Kr*
Cecil Olby what staff were employed, fir. Cecil Olby said:
"One Manager, two assistants, one van-driver, and a part-time
clerical assistant; with a wage bill of £M?, a week."
He
added that one of the staff was a very old man. Mr. Doyle also
D
asked Mr, Cecil Olby how the trade was geared as between the
retail trade and the wholesale trade*
fir. Cecil said:
"Two-thirds retail1 one-third wholesale - all over the counter"*
In other words, ltwas trade which was done froa the shop itself
and would not need r\ traveller to go round and canvass for
E
orders.
On those representations, Kr. Doyle agreed to buy this
business.
The agreement was entered into in January 1964.
Mr. Doyle agreed to pay £*f,500 down in cash, which covered the
goodwill, fixtures and fittings, and the remainder of the lease
(which had about four years to run)*
The stock was to be
F
bought on valuation*
In addition, there was a Restrictive
covenant on the sellers, Olby (Ironmongers) Ltd*, in which they
covenanted that they would not for five years engage in any
2*

Ironmongers' business within a radius of ten miles froa 12
Upper High Street, Epsom*
Mr* Doyle paid the £4,500* fie took over stock at a
valuation of £5»000 which he paid* He needed a longer lease,
so he surrendered the existing lease and took a longer lease at
a greatly increased rent. The freeholder who benefited was Mr*
A
Cecil Olby himself*
In order to pay all the money, Mr* Doyle put up all the
cash he had - £7*000$
and he raised £3,000 on mortgage from
Askinex Ltd*
_
So he went into occupation.
But I am afraid that things
were very different from what he was led to believe.
The
turnover was far less than he had been told.
The trade was not
all over-the-counter.
Half of the trade was wholesale business
which could only be obtained by employing a traveller to go
c
round to the customers.
Mr. Doyle could not afford to employ
a traveller.
So all that trade was lost.
The whole transac-
tion was a disaster for Mr. Doyle.
To add to his troubles, In
February 1964, soon after Mr. Doyle went into occupation, a
company called A. Olby Ltd* of Penge (which was closely
D
associated with the vendor company, A. Olby (Ironmongers) Ltd.)
canvassed and sent travellers round to customers who had been
previously customers of the Epsom business.
The Judge held that
this was not a breach of the restrictive covenant, though I am
not so sure about it*
E
Mr* Doyle was most dissatisfied, and in May 1964 he brought
this action for damages for fraud and conspiracy against the
company which sold him the Epsom business, that is, Olby
(Ironmongers) Ltd.; against Mr. Cecil Olby, who was the man who
worked in that business; Mr* Leslie Olby, his brother, who was
F
a direotor; and against A. Olby & Son Ltd., which was the
company at Penge, of which I!r. Leslie Olby was managing director*
Although Mr* Doyle had started the action, he had to remain
3.

£
in occupation. He had burnt his boats and had to carry on with
the business as best he could. He tried to sell it, but there
were difficulties. One was that the landlord, Mr* Ceoil Olby,
would not give hits a licence to assign, and so forth*
After
three years he did manage to sell it for a sum of some £3»700.
This cleared off the mortgage to Asklnex Ltd*, but he was left
with many outstanding debts to the bank, to suppliers, and the
like* His debts oame to £^,000, and he has been sued in the
County Court by many of his creditors*
The case came for trial before Mr* Justice Swanwlok in July
„
1967*
It took many dayss but in the end Mr. Justice Swanwlok
found that the defendants had been guilty of fraud and conspiracy.
The accounts which were produced in November 1963 to Mr* Doyle
contained "a blatantly wrong figure" for wages and management
remuneration.
The representation by Mr* Ceoil Olby that the
Q
sales were "all over the counter" was completely untrue, and must
feave been known to Mr. Cecil Olby to be untrue. He was a
traveller hlm«elf and went round to customers on two days a week
at least*
His wages amounted In the year 1962 to £5?>5»
That
figure was not brought into the accounts which were produced to
D
Mr* Doyle, and made them completely false* It turned out that
Mr, Cecil Olby had had a breakdown and was not really capable
of doing much business* But Mr* Doyle was not to know that*
The Judge found that the representations were false to the
knowledge of Mr* Ceoil Olby, and that this knowledge must be
E
imputed to the other defendants because he was acting on their
behalf*
Furthermore, there was a conspiracy between them to
defraud Mr* Doyle*
The defendantsput in a notioe of appeal against the finding
of fraud and conspiracy* It was on the list in this Court when
F
the oase was called on for hearing yesterday, but it was not
persisted in*
Mr« Smout abandoned it*
So we approach the case
on the acoepted footing that Mr* Doyle was induced by the fraud
4.

and conspiracy of the defendants to buy this business.
The Judge awarded Mr. Doyle £1,500 damages* Mr, Doyle
appeals against that award. £e says it is far too small.
The
Judge arrived &t the figure of £1,500 by aooepting the
submissions of Counsel then appearing for Mr* Doyle*
The Judge
said as to damagesi "My task is simplified by the submissions
of the plaintiff's Counsel, which I accept, that there are two
alternative bases for damages, each of which arrives at virtually
the same round figure.
The first is that, to preserve the
trade custom, it would have been necessary to employ a part-time
traveller at about £600 a year, and I think fchere is a
reasonable prospect that such a person could have been obtained*
If 2& times that figure is taken, that being the normal basis
for valuing goodwill, it aotually represents, as I have said,
a reduction in the value of the goodwill equivalent to the cost
of making good the representation, that is, about £1,500.
Second, and alternatively, if the trade custom was $0% of the
turnover, its loss would result in a reduction in the value of
the goodwill of 35$ to k0%, which, applied x,o the accountant's
figures of £^,000, again would approximate to a round figure of
£1,500*
Therefore, I think it is at this figure that I can
best quantify the loss."
It appears, therefore, that the plaintiff's Counsel submitt-
ed, and the Judge accepted, that the proper measure of damages
was the "cost of making good the representation", or what came
to the same thing, "the reduction In value of the goodwill" due
to the misrepresentation. In so doing, he treated fche
representation as if it were a contractual promise, that is, as
if tY-zjQ *rere a contractual term to the effect "The tradeis all
over the counter*
There is no need to employ a traveller*•
I think it was the wrong measure.
Damages for fraud and
conspiracy are assessed differently from damages for breach of
contract*
5.

v
It was submitted by Mr. Snout that we oould not, or, at any
rate, ought not, to correct this error. X do not agree. We
never allow a olient to suffer for the mistake of his Counsel if
we can possibly help it. We will always seek to rectify it as
far as we oan.
We will correct it whenever we are able to do
.
so without Injustice to the other side. Sometimes the error has
seriously affected the course of the evidence, in which case we
oan at best order a new trial. But there is nothing of that
kind here. The error was made at the end of the case.
All
the evidenoe had been taken on the footing that the damages
£
were at large.
It was only in the final submission that the
error was made.
Such an error we oan, and will, oorreot.
The second question is what is the proper measure of
damages for fraud, as distinct.from damages for breach of
oonoraet.
It was discussed during the argument in Hadley v.
C
Baxendale & Co. ((185^) 9 Ex. 3*H) t a*id finds a place in the
notes to Smith's Leading Cases (13th edition) page 563• where
it is suggested there is no difference. But in McConnel v.
Wright (1903 1 Ch. 5^6) at page 55^t Lord Collins pointed out
the difference. It was an aotion for fraudulent statements in
D
a prospectus whereby a man was induced to take up shares.
Lord Collins said of the aotion for frauds "It is not an action
for breach of contract, and, therefore, no damages in respeot
of prospective gains which the person contracting was entitled
by his contract to expect come in, but it is an aotion of
E
tort - it is an action for a wrong done whereby the plaintiff
was tricked out of oertain money in his pocket; and, therefore,
prima facie, the highest limit of his damages is the whole
extent of his loss9 and that loss is Ticssvired by the money whloh
was in his pooket and is now in the pocket; of the company."
^
But that statement was the subject of comment by Lord Atkin in
Clark v. Urauhart (1930 A.C. 28) at page67»
He said "I find it
dlffioult to suppose that there is any difference in the measure
of damages in an aotion of deceit depending upon the nature of
the transaotlon into which the plaintiff is fraudulently induced
to enter. Whether he buys shares*or buys sugar, whether he

subscribes for shares, or agrees to enter into a partnership, or
in any other way alters his position to his detriment, in
prinoiple, the ensure of damages should be the same, and whether
estimated by a jury or a judge. I should have thought it would
be based on the aotual damage direotly flowing from the fraudulent
inducement.
The formula in HcConnel v. Wright may be oorreot
or it may be expressed in too rigid terms."
I think that Lord Collins did express himself in too rigid
terms.
He seems to have overlooked consequential damages. On
prinoiple the distinction seems to be thist in contract, the
defendant has made a promise and broken it.
The objeot of
damages is to put the plaintiff in as good a position, as far as
money can do it, as if the promise had been performed.
In
fraud, the defendant has been guilty of a deliberate wrong by
inducing the plaintiff to act to his detriment.
The objeot of
damages is to compensate the plaintiff for all the loss he has
suffered, so far, again, as money can do it. In contract, the
damages are limited to what say reasonably be supposed to have
been in tab contemplation of the parties.
In fraud, they are
not so limited.
The defendant is bound to make reparation for
all the actual damages direotly flowing from the fraudulent
inducement.
The person who has been defrauded is entitled to
sayt
"I would not have entered into this bargain at all but
for your representation.
Owing to your fraud, I have not only
lost all the money I paid you, but, what is more, I have been
put to a large amount of extra expmse as well and suffered this
or that extra damages."
All such damages can be reooveredi
and it does not lie in the mouth of the fraudulent person to
say that they oouM not reasonably have been foreseen.
For
instance, in this very case Mr. Doyle has not only lost the
money whloh he paid for the business, vhioh he would never have
done if there had been no fraudt he put all that money in and
lost it;
but also he has been put to expenseand loss in trying
to run a business which has turned out to be a disaster for him.
He is entitled to damages for all his loss, subject, of oourse

to giving oredlt for any benefit that he has received.
There
is nothing to he taken off in mitigations for there is nothing
more that he oould have done to reduoe his loss.
He did all
that he oould reasonably be expected to do*
This brings us to the third questions must we send the
case back for a new trial for damages{ or oan we assess them
A
ourselves?
The difficulty is that we have not got a transcript
of all the evidence* Mr* Doyle is a poor man* He oomes here
without legal aid* He was unable to afford a transoript.
The
defendants, I presume, oould afford it*, but; they have not
thought fit to get one. There was a finding of fraud and
B
conspiracy against them. They gave notice of appeal against that
finding*
Yet they did not get a transoript of the evidenoe*
It was they who ought to have done so* In these circumstances
I do not think it would be right to put either party to the
c
expense of getting a full transcript of eight or nine days*
evidenoe with all the delay that would entail.
The Court must
do the best it can to put right the error which has taken place,
I will not go into the details myself as to the figures. It is
a case for assessing damages at large much as a jury would do»
D
Lord JustioeWinn has considered the matter carefully and he
will deal with it; but I say in advance that I agree with the
fi.ure which he is going to propose, that the damages should
be in the sum of £5*500.
LOHD JUSTICE WINN: lagree respectfully entirely with the Judgment
E
delivered by my Lord, and desire only to eoho and then add a
little to what he has said about the proper measure of damages
for deceit;* It is a most remarkable fact, as my Lord has
remarked, that there is a oomplete dearth of authority upon the
toplo of the proper measure of damages in such a case*
I
F
would pay tribute to the passage in chapter *H in Mayne &
MoGregor on Damages, 12th edition, where, in paragraphs 955 ©Jad
some following paragraphs the learned authors have in effect
8.

proposed9 in the absence of authority - since the oases to which
they refer really lend no support for their proposition - that
there should be a clear distinction drawn between the measure
of damages which can be recovered for suoh a breach of contract
as a breach of warranty as to the quality or value or condition
of goods or premises sold, and the measure of damages for deceit -
A
tortious fraudulent deceit.
They make that proposition, and
perhaps, if the Judgment of this Court were to stand, they will
in their next book have support for what they themselves were
thinking.
They refer to MoConnel v. Wright, the cage which my
„
Lord has mentioned, and the oase of Clark v, Urquhart (1030 A.C.
28), where a passage from Lord Atkin occurred which has been read
by my Lord*
It is right too observe that that passage of Lord
the
Atkin's speech was entirely obiter, since/subject-matter of th«*
case then before their Lordships* House was nothing more than
c
the proper form of order which should be made in the particular
case, where there had been a payment into Court with a denial
of liability and a number of complicated events.
When one
finds a great lawyer cf Lord Atkin's standing saying that which
my Lord has quoted, for my part I think there is ample
D
authority for the propositions in the edition of Mayne to which
I have referred and the ruling which this Court is now giving.
It is of interest, though of no direct support to that ruling,
to note that a very similar distinction is found in decided
authorities between damages for breach of contract and damages
E
for breach of warranty of authority to contract on a principal^
behalf.
In the case of Flrbank's Executors v. Humphreys
(18 Q.B.D. 5*0 at page 60 Lord Esher said: "The damages, under
the general rule, are arrived at by considering the difference
in the position he would have been in had the representation
F
been true, and the position he is actually in, in consequence
of its being untrue0.
It appears to me that in a case where
there has been e breach of warranty of authority, and still more
con
clearly where there has been a tortious wrons-/misting of a
fraudulent inducement, the proper starting point for any Court
9.

oalled upon to consider what damages are recoverable by the
defrauded person is to compare his position before the
representation was made to him with his position after it, brougt
about by that representation, always bearing in mind that no
element in the consequential position can be regarded as
attributable loss and damage if it be too remote a consequences
it will be too remote not neoessarily because it was not
contemplated by the representor but in any case where the person
deoeived has not himself behaved with reasonable prudence,
reasonable common sense or oan in any true sense be aald to have
been the author of his own misfortune* The damage that he seeks
to recover must have flowed directly from the fraud perpetrated
upon him*
I gave myself during the argument in this Court an
illustration - hypothetical, of course - which I understood Mr.
Smout was prepared to aooept as theoretically a sound illustra-
tion of the principle which these judgments are enunciating, for
the first time, it may be, always assuming, of course, that that
principle was itself to be acoepted. If a man In this country is
made the vlotlm of a fraudulent misrepresentation that a business
in Bangkok, Hong Kong, Manilla or the Fiji Islands has certain
equipment, certain assets, certain goodwill, certain trade
oontraotsand profits, and is thereby induced to pay for that
business, it being, of course, understood by both parties to
the transaction of sale for the procurement of which a fraudul-
ent misrepresentation is made, that he will set out to that
remote place with his family and it may be his household goods,
at very considerable expense, and on arrival will acquire living
accommodation and perhaps have to b&y additional furniture and
engage staff tr servants, and he acts upon the representations
and Incurs al.~ such expenses, and the business is found to be
very different from that which it was fraudulently represented
to be, so that he cannot survive out In the remote place to which
he has gone and is bound to come back again, then I, speaking
10.

for myself, would not hesitate to give him all the outgoings
from his 7>ooket of the kinds which I have indicated up to such
time as he should sensibly have come home again and had the money
to come back again, legs, of course, by way of set-off, any
benefit which he has derived from the exploitation of suoh assets
as he found there upon his arrival*
A
Having said that much, one turns to the instant case.
It
i», as my Lord has said and X respeotfully agree, essentially a
matter for a Jury* X think myself with confidence that there is
already sufficient evidentiary material available to enable this
„
Court to make a jury assessment in round rigures. It would be
D
wrong and indeed an intolerable expenditure of Judicial time and
money of the parties to embark upon any detailed consideration
of isolated items in the account on which a balance must bo
struck,
I have looked at it myself in this way, and have
P
arrived, let me say at onoe, at the same figure that my Lord has
already mentioned.
The starting point is a simple one:
£*f,500 was paid away out of his pocket by the plaintiff to acquire
this business;
and a further £5»000, in round figures, to take
over stock at valuation. That was £9,500,
When he oame
D
ultimately to leave the business, X say quite confidentially that
s
he is not revealed by the evidence now before this Court, nor do
I think it could have been shown by any evidenoe, having regard
to the general circumstances of the case, to have hung on too
long or to have behaved otherwise than as a sensible basiness
E
man or to have, brought misfortune upon himself. When he gave up
the business after three years, he got out of it at that time
£3,500 from the purchaser to who"n he sold it, and he had, at a
knook-down price, which I think was forced upon him, £800 for the
sale of such stock as he then had. During the time that he was
F
running or trying £0 run and revive this moribund, if not dead
business, he drew £10 a week to live on out of the till, if one
may use that expression, and he lived with his wife in part of the
11.

pr«mis©s» for the totality of which he was paying a rental of
£800 a yo*T9 plus, of course0 rates.
I think he shouSd be
debited with the £10 a week for the period and debited with £300
a year, making £900, for such living accommodation benefit as he
then and his wife reoelved froa these premises. I would take those
two items at a round figure together of £2,500. Adding up the
benefits which I have mentioned, I arrive at a figure of ^6,700
and call It £7,000.
At that point, comparing outgoings with suoh
benefits as ought to be set off, there is a gap or balance of
losses of £2,500.
Then one considers other consequences in terms
of finance, because no damages are being awarded, at any rate,
in this case today, by the Court for worry., strain^ anxiety and
unhapplness; it may be that in some oases such considerations
ffii&ht well be appropriate.
He lost during the time he was trying
to run this business additionally £700 that he borrowed from his
mother and another relative.
He incurred an overdraft of £1,400
with his bankers. At the time when he came out of cocupatlon he
was owing £*f-80 odd for rates.
He also owed some items, the items
which he could actually recall in Court, totalling about £100, for
goods supplied.
He had been paying £22 odd a month Interest on
the loan of £^,000 which he had to raise in order to enable hia
to meet the purchase price of the business and the stock, whioh
I have already mentioned.
I do not propose to say more about
details.
If it were appropriate to go into those item by item,
then I would think that three or four days would be set aside
before some tribunal to investigate with osore complete dlsoovwryj
I venture to hope the result would not differ very much from that
which I, as a common Juror, have arrived at. As I say, one brings
in those ite&s. I have taken them at £6,800 which I have called
£7,000 for the benefits, a gap of £2,500; and, having regard to
the plaintiff's evidence — when I say "evidenca** I mean evidence
before the trial Judge — and his answers to questions In this
Court which I accept from him as an honest man, I think that a

further round figure of £3*000 (for an estimated £3,380) should fee
added* and that his total loss should be £2,500 plus £3»0Q0 ~»
£5p5O0, as an award of damages* That $&ans that this appeal
should bo allow©!9 in ay view, to that extent*
LORD JUSTICE SACHSi
J agree with all that has fallen from toy Lords
and with the avard they propose*
I would first like to add a fen words on the question whether
anything that happened at trial should debar the plaintiff torn
recovering tba amount of damages to which he is in law entitled*
It has teen submitted on behalf of the respondents that because
in his closing address Counsel for the plaintiff adopted at first
instance an approaoh which led to the Judge leaking an assessment
of damage?* upon t.^e wrens basis, this Court oannot now award this
plaintiff the sua to whloh in law he is entitled. Where an
arsuoent presented to this Court is different froo that put before
the trial Judge, this Court oust approaoh with a degree of caution
the--<tfe*©fc±ott the question of whether to consider the new
arguments
but, after such examination it should be slow to
impose a bar which vould drive from the Judgment seat any tcan with
a Jjst claim merely because it was not at trial presented in the
best -ay.
Unless the respondent can, at any rate, show that hs
has been prejudiced by the course taken ac first instance to such
an extent that departure from it would be unjust to> the
respondent, there should be no bar. The books are full of
instances where an appellant has sueoeeded on a different point
to that taken at the trial*
If and in so far as an erroneous
approach at trial merely results in additional costs to the
respondents, that can, of course, in appropriate oases be a
matter to be dealt with by the appellate Court.
In the present case one has the position that the plaintiff
hews been the viotis of a deplorable fraud — deplorable as regards
the complete disregard of the defendants for ooenercial honesty;
h@ has been awarded a sum that goes nowhere nesr the proper
13e

£ c-^pensation, and to my oind0 for the reasons given by the
Master of the Bolls, there is no good reason why this Court should
not order a proper compensatory award*
Turning now to the issue ae to how much shall be awarded,
it is the faot that the law as to the measure of damages
A recoverable in actions for deceit is one in which there is a
dearth of direct authority except in cases relating to the
purchase of shares, of goods, and of land, all of which have
certain factors in ocamon.
The resulting problem is one which for
my part I first came across some 35 years ago, and it is a problem
B that has in various forms recurred not infrequently in oaseti with
which it has been my lot to be conoemed. I take some comfort
in the faot that over all that period it has seemed to me that
practitioners have in general taken the same clear course as this
Court is today adopting - based upon that passage in Clark v,
C Urquhart which is worth again recalling; in his speech Lord
Atkin said in a concise manner: "I should have thought it" - that
is the measure of damages - "would be based on the actual damage
directly flowing from the fraudulent inducement,"
In oases such as the present the wrong done is tricking a
D
plaintiff into a contract, and the plaintiff Is entitled by way
of damages to whatever sua he has lost by being thus tricked.
The question as to what a purchaser has lost must naturally depend
on the subject-matter of the oontract.
If the contract is simply
one such as the purchase of shares, normally the masisisa loss
'
will be the money out of which the purchaser has been tricked,
a sum which, however, may well include brokerage or stamp duty:
the value of benefits received will be taken into account. If the
purchase is one of a business which the plaintiff but for the
fraud would not have acquired at all, the objective of the Court
is to put the plaintiff, in so far as it is possible, into the
same position financially as if he had not entered into the
contract at all; in other words, one must look at the end result
14.

of his having entered into the transaction and find out what was his
loss over all.
In this behalf I entirely agree with what has
fallen from my Lords*
The acquiring of a fccQloaan does normally
entail the expenses of moving into fresh premises, keeping the
business going, and at any rate cent; inuing to keep it going
until suoh time as it car: be disposed of; and then one locks also
A
at the expenses of selling*
The computation of the loss may in
many oases not be easy*
Thus the Court must obviously take care
not to include sums for consequences which may be due to the
plaintiff*s own unreasonable actions, end also not to include
results which are too remote - matters which often involve
B
difficult questions of fact and degree.
But such difficulties do
not alter the duty of the Court which should approach the matter
on a broad basis*
In this case the central fact is that the plaintiff waz
tricked into buying a business which he would not otherwise have
C
bou&ht at all.
It wasone which, even with suitable protective
oovenants from the fourth defendant — and none were acquired —
would anyway have been singularly unattractive to anyone who
had honestly been told all the relevant facts. It was a business
on which suoh goodwill as there was depended greatly on whatever
course might be adopted by the fourth defendant in the future; and
I for my part doubt whether a suitable protective covenant which
would have worked from a practical point of view could have
been devised.
Any value attached to the business itself a«
r being a going concern on an independent basis was very small
indeed;
and it would seem to me that when once the faous were
fully known to a purchaser, any sizeable payment for goodwill
would have been very unlikely.
In fact, as matters turned out, the fourth defendants, part of
p what was called "the Oiby empire", and whose name was A. Olby &
Son Ltd*9 did within either weeks of the sale of the relevant
business (whioh was being carried on as A, Olby & Sons), for
reasons which they were in law entitled to adopt, take a coarse
15.

which in praotioe saw to it that any goodwill of the business
sold/^aa recovered for the empire, got back into the hands of
the fourth defendants.
For when the plaintiff raised the
question of whether he had not been tricked by the first defendant,
the fourth defendant cut off his supplies and set about canvassing
the customers of the business sold; and we have had the benefit
A
of having seen a letter signed by a director of the fourth
defendant which contains, amongst other things, two lists, "The
list marked 'B" contains accounts which dealt with Epsom" -
that is to say, the business sold - "and Mr* Coombe was instructed
on the 20th February 196^ to call on those customers on behalf
B
of Penge,
Likewise, list 'C* contains Epsom accounts and" -
another gentleman - was asked to call on behalf of Penge" - the
fourth defendant - "as from the same date",
I mention those
facts because, whilst thatdefendants was entitled to take that
coursewhich they in fact later did, it does demonstrate the risks
which a purchaser of the business sold would take and would have
a bearing on what is the proper measure of damages if one had
in this instance to make a separate assessment of the value of the
business sold, as Mr. Smout submitted.
In practice, however,
D
any value it had is taken into account in the balance worked out
by Lord Justice Winn.
Now turning from the general picture to figures, for my
part I do not wish to add anything to what has been said on detail
by my Lord, Lord Justice Winn.
I would only add this, that,
E
making my calculations, at tlses by a slightly different route,
from that taken in the oourse of his judgment, I came to a figure
within a very small margin indeed of £5»500, before I had heard
any of the questions put to or answers given by Mr, Doyle to certain
matters in this Court.
That figure of £.$95®® seems the right
F
figure, purely upon the basis of those facts which were, we have
been told, in evidence before the trial Judge: it has been
reached on a broad basis and it is one with which I find myself
in full agreement,
16,

Appeal allowedi
Judgment for £5a500 instead of £1,500,
with all the plaintiff's costs.
A
B
C
D
F
17.
