90/811
1
ASSN.
A
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF JUDICATURE
1981 E No.263
COURT OF APPEAL (CIVIL DIVISION)
ON APPEAL FROM THE HIGH COURT OF JUSTICE
QUEEN'S BENCH DIVISION
Royal Courts of Justice
B
(HIS HONOUR JUDGE TUCKER Q.C.,
Sitting as a Deputy High Court Judge)
Friday 28th September 1990
Before:
LORD JUSTICE MUSTILL
C
LORD JUSTICE BUTLER-SLOSS
and
LORD JUSTICE BELDAM
BETWEEN:
TERENCE EARDLEY EAST
First Plaintiff
D
and
(Respondent)
JANET DAISY MAUD EAST
Second Plaintiff
(Respondent)
and
ROGER JOSEPH MAURER
First Defendant
(Appellant)
E
and
ROGER de PARIS & COMPANY
LTD.
Second Defendant
(Appellant)
F
(Transcript of the Shorthand Notes of the Association of Official
Shorthandwriters Ltd., Room 392, Royal Courts of Justice and 2
New Square, Lincoln's Inn, London WC2A 3RU. Tel: 071 405 9884/5).
MR. ROBIN SHAWCROSS (instructed by Messrs. Johnsons, Solicitors,
Lymington, Hampshire, SO41 9AL) appeared on behalf of the
Defendants (Appellants).
G
MR. JEREMY NICHOLSON (instructed by Messrs. Edwards & Bodley,
Solicitors, Christchurch, Dorset, BH23 1QD) appeared on behalf of
the Plaintiffs (Respondents).
JUDGMENT
H
(Revised)
- 1 -
L
ASSN.
A
LORD JUSTICE MUSTILL: I have asked Lord Justice Beldam to deliver
the first judgment on this appeal.
LORD JUSTICE BELDAM: Ever changing style and fashion makes the
ability to attract and satisfy intending customers a particularly
B
valuable asset in the proprietor of a ladies' hair styling salon.
According to the evidence, it was an attribute possessed by the
first defendant who, in 1979, owned two salons in Bournemouth
which he carried on under the name of Roger de Paris. One of
C
the salons was at 44 Haven Road, Canford Cliffs. It had only
recently been opened under the managership of a Mr. Mole. The
other salon, at 37 Exeter Road, was closer to the centre of the
town. Canford Cliffs, as those who are familiar with the area
D
will know, is an expensive and fashionable area in which to live
and the need to keep up with fashion may be more pronounced there.
But the salon at 37 Exeter Road was conveniently placed for hotel
guests and was close to the central shopping area. It was also
E
much longer established. The first defendant had, by 1979, been
there, first as an employee and then as its proprietor since 1958.
The first defendant's experience in styling ladies' hair was
cosmopolitan. From time to time he had worked in salons in
F
Hamburg, in Stockholm, in Paris, in Lausanne and in Mayfair. He
had also taken part in competitions at international level.
According to witnesses he had a personality which reflected his
G
experience and, as the judge found, he had built up at Exeter Road
a very good business.
By 1979, he had decided to concentrate his efforts at a
smaller and more exclusive salon, he had decided to sell his
H
Exeter Road business and to devote all his energies to
- 2 -
3
ASSN.
A
Canford Cliffs. The plaintiffs bought the business at Exeter Road
from him in September 1979. The second plaintiff, Mrs. East,
intended to continue the business, but under the style and name
of "Xellance". The second plaintiff herself had had considerable
B
experience as a ladies' hairdresser and stylist, but it was of a
more restricted character. She had run, successfully, several
businesses in outlying districts of Oxford, Iffley and Kennington,
but she and her husband wanted to have a business in the Bournemouth
C
area and so, for £20,000, they bought the salon at Exeter Road from
the first defendant and his company, the second defendant.
In the course of the negotiations for the sale they learned
that the first defendant had had another salon at Canford Cliffs, but
D
he deliberately and completely misled the plaintiffs about his
intentions. He told them falsely that he had no intention of
working at the Canford Cliffs salon unless, for example a staff
emergency arose due to illness or for some other reason. He told them that
E
he intended to open a salon abroad, probably in Switzerland.
Such an intention obviously meant that his valuable personal
contact with the clientele at Exeter Road could not follow him to
the Continent and would probably not follow him to the Canford
F
Cliffs salon because he would not be working there. His
representations would obviously play a most significant part in
inducing the plaintiffs to buy the salon, and so the learned
G
judge held. He found that the representations were false to
the first defendant's knowledge, and held that the plaintiffs
were entitled to damages. on this aspect of the case there is
no appeal against his finding.
H
Mrs. East started to run the salon on 1st September 1979.
- 3 -

ASSN.
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
It was not long before it was apparent to her, and to others who
were working in the salon, that the level of business was falling
away at an alarming rate. In due course she learned that the
first defendant was working full time at his Canford Cliffs salon.
For just over three years Mrs. East tried to make the salon
profitable. In her attempts she spent considerable sums on
advertising; she installed a solarium bed and eventually began
to combine the hairdressing business with a boutique.
During this period she made several attempts to sell the
business and eventually, on 6th February 1989 she succeeded in
selling the lease of the premises for £7,500. The learned judge
found that the plaintiffs had behaved reasonably throughout; that
they could not have sold the business before they actually did.
He awarded them damages totalling £33,328; interest on the sums
awarded brought the total award to £55,205.
His award was made up in this way. Firstly, he took the
capital expenditure by taking the cost price of the business,
£20,000, and deducting from it the amount realised on the sale,
thus arriving at the figure of £12,500. Secondly, he awarded the
plaintiffs the fees and expenses incurred by them in buying and
selling the business, and in carrying out improvements in an
attempt to make it profitable. The figures awarded there amounted
in total to £2,390. Next, he awarded trading losses incurred
during the 3½ years during which the plaintiffs attempted to run
the business. Those amounted to £2,438.
The next head of damages he awarded has led
the defendants to appeal to this court against the amount of the
damages. In addition to the sums already mentioned, he awarded
- 4 -
ASSN.
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
plaintiffs loss of profits during the 3½ year period
arriving at a figure of £15,000. Finally he awarded the figure
of £1,000 as general damages for disappointment and inconvenience
of the plaintiffs in their attempt to establish this business.
It is against the award of £15,000 for loss of
profit that the defendants now appeal.
Mr. Shawcross, for the appellants, submits that there
is a difference in the manner in which damages are assessed for
breach of contract and for the tort of deceit. He says that
the authorities show that no damages at all are recoverable for
loss of profits in an action of deceit. Although there is no express
decision which states that to be the case, in no case which has dealt
with the proper measure of damage in an action of
deceit, has there been an award for loss of profits,
although one would have expected to see one. He concedes that
if his submission in this regard is correct there would have to
be a compensatory factor, for the learned judge only awarded
interest on the capital expended from 2nd February 1983, when the
plaintiffs ceased to carry on the business and sold it. So
Mr. Shawcross concedes that if his submission is right, the
plaintiff will be entitled to interest on the award for that
3½ year period. Finally, he submits that even if damages for
loss of profit are recoverable, the learned judge assessed the
figure at too high a level, and on an incorrect basis.
That the measure of damages for the tort of deceit and for breach
of contract are different, no longer needs support from
authority. Damages for deceit are not
awarded on the basis that the plaintiff is to be put in
- 5 -
ASSN.
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
as good a position as if the statement had been true; they are
to be assessed on a basis which would compensate the plaintiff for
all the loss he has suffered, so far as money can do it.
This was confirmed in the case of Doyle v. Olby (Ironmongers)
Limited, to which both the learned judge and this court were
referred; it is reported in [1969] Q.B. Reports at page 158
and was a case in which the facts were similar to those of
the present case.
In the course of his judgment Lord Denning M.R. said
at page 166:
'The second question is what is the proper measure of
damages for fraud, as distinct from damages for breach of
contract. It was discussed in the argument in Hadley v.
Baxendale (1854) 9 Ex. 341, and finds a place in the notes
to Smith's Leading Cases, 13th ed. (1929) at p. 563, where it
is suggested there is no difference. But in McConnel v.
Wright [1903] 1 Ch. 546, 554, Lord Collins M.R. pointed out
the difference. It was an action for fraudulent statements
in a prospectus whereby a man was induced to take up shares.
Lord Collins said of the action for fraud:
'It is not an action for breach of contract, and,
therefore, no damages in respect of prospective gains
which the person contracting was entitled by his
contract to expect to come in, but it is an action of
tort. It is an action for a wrong done whereby the
plaintiff was tricked out of certain money in his
pocket; and, therefore, prima facie, the highest
limit of his damages is the whole extent of his loss,
and that loss is measured by the money which was in his
pocket and is now in the pocket of the company.'
But that statement was the subject of comment by Lord Atkin
in Clark v. Urquhart [1930] A.C.28, 67-68. He said:
'I find it difficult to suppose that there is any
difference in the measure of damages in an action of
deceit depending upon the nature of the transaction
into which the plaintiff is fraudulently induced to
enter. Whether he buys shares or buys sugar,
whether he subscribes for shares, or agrees to enter
into a partnership, or in any other way alters his
position to his detriment, in principle, the measure
of damages should be the same, and whether estimated
by a jury or a judge. I should have thought it would
be based on the actual damage directly flowing from
- 6 -

ASSN.
7

A
the fraudulent inducement. The formula in
McConnell v. Wright [1903] 1 Ch. 546 may be
correct or it may be expressed in too rigid terms.'

I think that Lord Collins did express himself in too rigid
terms. He seems to have overlooked consequential damages.
On principle the distinction seems to be this. In contract
the defendant has made a promise and broken it. The object
of damages is to put the plaintiff in as good a position,
as far as money can do it, as if the promise had been
performed. In fraud, the defendant has been guilty of a
deliberate wrong by inducing the plaintiff to act to his
detriment. The object of damages is to compensate the
plaintiff for all the loss he has suffered, so far, again,
as money can do it. In contract, the damages are limited
to what may reasonably be supposed to have been in the
contemplation of the parties. In fraud, they are not so
limited. The defendant is bound to make reparation for all
the actual damages directly flowing from the fraudulent
inducement. The person who has been defrauded is entitled
to say:

B

C

D
'I would not have entered into this bargain at all but
for your representation. Owing to your fraud, I
have not only lost all the money I paid you, but what
is more, I have been put to a large amount of extra
expense and well and suffered this or that extra damages.'

E

F

All such damages can be recovered; and it does not lie in
the mouth of the fraudulent person to say that they could
not reasonably have been foreseen. For instance, in this
very case, Mr. Boyle has not only lost the money which he
paid for the business, which he would never have done if
there had been no fraud; he put all that money in and
lost it; but also he has been put to expense and loss in
trying to run a business which has turned out to be a
disaster for him. He is entitled to damages for all his
loss, subject, of course to giving credit for any benefit
that he has received. There is nothing to be taken off
in mitigation; for there is nothing more that he could
have done to reduce his loss. He did all that he could
reasonably be expected to do."

In the present case it seems to me that the difference can be

G
put in this way. The first defendant did not warrant to the
plaintiffs that all the customers with whom he had a professional
rapport would remain customers of the salon at Exeter Road. He
represented that he would not be continuing to practise as a
H
stylist in the immediate area.
The observations of Lord Denning, to

- 7 -

ASSN.
8

A
which I have referred, are supported by an earlier judgment of Dixon J., as he
then was, in the case of Toteff v. Antonas [1952] 87 Commonwealth
Law Reports, a decision of the High Court of Australia. In that
case, at page 650, Dixon J. said:

B

C

D

E

F

"In an action of deceit a plaintiff is entitled to recover
as damages a sum representing the prejudice or disadvantage
he has suffered in consequence of his altering his position
under the inducement of the fraudulent misrepresentations
made by the defendant. When what he has been induced to do
is to make a purchase from the defendant and part with his
money to him in payment of the price, then, if the transac-
tion stands and is not disaffirmed or rescinded what is
recoverable is 'the difference between the real value of
the property' and the sum which the plaintiff has induced
to give for it' per Abbott v. L.C.C. Pearson v. Wheeler. As
Sir James Hannen P. in Peek v. Derry pointed out the question
is how much worse off is the plaintiff than if he had not
entered into the transaction. If he had not done so he would
have had the purchase money in his pocket. To ascertain
his loss you must deduct from the amount he paid the real
value of the thing he got. It may be objected that the
point of the application of this doctrine lies in identifying
'the transaction' and that what Mayo J. has done is to
identify it as the purchase of the goodwill and that only.
But what is meant is the transaction into which the
representation induced the plaintiff to enter. The measure
of damages in an action of deceit consists in the loss or
expenditure incurred by the plaintiff in consequence of the
inducement on which he relied diminished by the corresponding
advantage in money or moneys worth obtained by him on the
other side: Potts v. Miller. You look to what he has been
induced to part with as the initial step. He is entitled
to say that but for the fraud he would never have parted with
his money; per Coleridge L.C.J. Twycross v. Grant. But he
cannot recover the entire price he has paid unless the thing
gave wholly worthless. If the thing has any appreciable
value the damages must be reduced pro tanto: per Cockburn
L.C.J. Twycross v. Grant. It must not be forgotten that
after all deceit is an action on the case for special damages
incurred in consequence of the defendant's fraudulent
inducement."

Mr. Shawcross has pointed out that both in the case of Doyle

G
v. Olby and in the case of Toteff v. Antonas, none of the judgments
referred to loss of profit as a recoverable head of damage; it may
well be that the facts of each of those cases and the period in-
volved before the claims were made, may not have made loss of profit
H
a considerable head of damage. But as to the statements of

- 8 -

ASSN.
9

A
principle to which I have referred, it seems to me clear
that there is no basis upon which one could say that loss of
profits incurred whilst waiting for an opportunity to realise to
its best advantage a business which has been purchased, are
B
irrecoverable. It is conceded that losses made in the course
of running the business of a company, are recoverable. If in fact th
plaintiffs lost the profit which they could reasonably have
expected from running a business in the area
C
of a kind similar to the business in this
case, I can see no reason why those do not fall within the words
of Lord Atkin in Clark v. Urquhart, "actual damage directly flowing
from the fraudulent inducement".
D
So I consider that on the facts found by the learned judge
in the present case, the plaintiffs did establish that they had
suffered a loss due to the defendants' misrepresentation which
arose from their inability to earn the profits in the business
E
which they hoped to buy in the Bournemouth area.
I would therefore reject the submission of Mr. Shawcross
that loss of profits is not a recoverable head of damage in cases
of this kind.
F
However, I am not satisfied that in arriving at the figure
of £15,000 the learned judge approached the quantification of those
damages on the correct basis. It seems to me that he was inclined to base his award
G
on an assessment of the profits which the business actually bought
by the plaintiffs might have made if the statement made by the
first defendant had amounted to a warranty that customers would
continue to patronise the salon in Exeter Road; further,
H
that he left out of account a number of significant factors.

- 9 -

10

ASSN.

A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H

What he did was to found his award on an evaluation which he made
of the profits of the business at Exeter Road made by the first
defendant in the year preceding the purchase of the business by
the plaintiffs. Basing himself on figures which had been
given to him by an accountant, and making an allowance for
inflation he arrived at a figure for the profits which might have
been made if the first defendant had continued to run the
business at Exeter Road during the 3½ years. He then made an
allowance, only for the fact that the second plaintiff's
experience in hair styling and hairdressing was not as extensive
or as cosmopolitan as that of the first defendant. Thus he
based his award on an assessment of what the profits would have
been, less a deduction of 25% for the second plaintiff's lack of
experience.

It seems to me that he should have begun by considering
the kind of profit which the second plaintiff might have made if
the representation which induced her to buy the business at
Exeter Road had not been made, and that involved considering
the kind of profits which she might have expected to make in
another hairdressing business bought for a similar sum.
Mr. Nicholson has argued that on the evidence of Mr. Knowles, an
experienced accountant, the learned judge could have arrived at
the same or an equivalent figure on that basis. I do not agree.
The learned judge left out of account the fact that the second
plaintiff was moving into an entirely different area and one
in which she was, comparatively speaking, a stranger. Secondly,
that she was going to deal with a different clientele. Thirdly,
that there were almost certainly in that area of Bournemouth other hairdressing

- 10 -

11

ASSN.

A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H

salons which represented competition and which, in
any event, if the first defendant had, as he had represented, gone
to open a salon on the Continent, could have attracted the custom of his
former clients.

The learned Judge, as Mr. Nicholson has pointed out, had two
clear starting points. First, that any person investing
£20,000 in a business would expect a greater return than if
the sum was left safely in the bank or in a building society earning
interest, and a reasonable figure for that at the rates then prevailing
would have been at least £6,000. Secondly, he says that the
salary of a hairdresser's assistant in the usual kind of establish-
ment was at this time £40 per week and that the assistant could
expect tips in addition. That would produce a figure of over
£7,000, but the proprietor of a salon would clearly expect to earn
more, having risked his money in the business. It seems to me that
those are valid points from which to start to consider
what would be a reasonable sum to award for loss of profits of a
business of this kind. As was pointed out by Winn L.J., in the
case of Doyle v. Olby, this is not a question which can be
considered on a mathematical basis. It has to be considered
essentially, in the round, making what he described as a "jury
assessment".

Taking all the factors into account, I think
that the learned judge's figure was too high; for my part I would
have awarded a figure of £10,000 for that head of damage, and to
this extent I would allow the appeal.

LORD JUSTICE BUTLER-SLOSS: For the reasons given in the judgment of
Beldam L.J. I agree that the appeal should be allowed to the
limited extent which he has set out.

- 11 -

12

ASSN.

A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H

LORD JUSTICE MUSTILL: I also agree.

In my judgment the best course in a case of this kind is
to begin by comparing the position of the plaintiff as it would
have been if the act complained of had not taken place with the
position of the plaintiff as it actually became. This establishes
the actual loss which the plaintiff has suffered and often helps
to avoid the pitfalls of double counting, omissions and impermiss-
ible awards of both a capital and an income element in respect of
the same loss: see Cullinane v. British "Rema" Manufacturing Co. Ltd.,
[1954] 1 Q.B. 292, although even then mistakes are sometimes hard to avoid.

It is only when this exercise is complete that attention can
be given to whether on grounds of principle some items must be
omitted or, exceptionally, added. In the present case the act
complained of is the making of the fraudulent representation,
coupled with the reliance placed upon it by the plaintiffs in
concluding the bargain. If this had not happened the plaintiffs
would, on the judge's findings, have sold the Oxford business and
bought a new business in Bournemouth, albeit not the one in
Exeter Road. Thus, by the time the writ was issued they would have
had the capital asset constituted by the new business, plus the
profits made by that new business in the intervening period. One
may assume the value of this capital asset to be the same as the
value which the plaintiffs placed on the Exeter Road business,
namely £20,000. In the event, the plaintiffs' position is that
they have no business; they are out of pocket in respect of
the legal fees, improvements and accumulated losses on Exeter Road,

- 12 -

ASSN.
13
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
and they are in pocket to the extent of £7,500 made on the
realisation of the premises. If one then subtracts the one
from the other, the plaintiffs' loss is shown to be £20,000 minus
£7,500, namely £12,500, plus accumulated losses and resale expenditures
and the profits which would have been derived from the putative
new Bournemouth business. This is what the judge has in fact
awarded.
It is objected that the loss of profits is not properly
recoverable because it is appropriate not toaclaim in fraud but
to a claim based on a contractual warranty of profits, for in such
a case the loss of profits does not stem from the making of the
contract but from the fact that the profit made was not what was
anticipated.
I should have thought this argument sound if the judge had
included an item for loss of the Exeter Road profits; but he has
not done so. The loss of profits awarded relates to the hypothetical
profitable business in which the plaintiffs would have engaged
but for buying the Exeter Road business, and the profits of the
latter are treated by the judge solely as some evidence of what the
profits of the other business might have been. In my judgment
there is no error of principle here.
As to the second issue in the case, relating to the quantifica-
tion of the loss of profits of the putative new business, I have
nothing to add to what has been said by my Lord , and I too
would allow this appeal to the limited extent which he has proposed.
(Order: Appeal allowed to extent indicated in judgment of
Beldam L.J.; appellant to have half costs of appeal, not
to be enforced without leave; sum in court and interest
thereon to be paid out to respondents' solicitors; liberty
to apply, both sides).
- 13 -
