© Crown Copyright
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF JUDICATURE CHANI 92/1492/B
IN THE COURT OF APPEAL (CIVIL DIVISION)
ON APPEAL FROM THE HIGH COURT OF JUSTICE
CHANCERY DIVISION
(LORD JUSTICE HOFFMANN)
 Royal Courts of Justice,
 Strand, London, WC2A 2LL.
 Wednesday 9th March 1994.

Before:

THE MASTER OF THE ROLLS

(Sir Thomas Bingham)

LORD JUSTICE BELDAM

and

LORD JUSTICE SAVILLE

----------------------

THE LAW DEBENTURE TRUST CORPORATION PLC

 Plaintiff (Respondent)

- v -

(1) THE URAL CASPIAN OIL CORPORATION

(2) THE NORTH CAUCASIAN OIL FIELDS LIMITED

(3) THE NEW SCHIBAIEFF PETROLEUM COMPANY LIMITED

(4) THE GROZNY-SUNDJA OIL FIELDS LIMITED

(5) HILLDON LIMITED

(6) CASPIAN RESOURCES LIMITED

 Defendant (Appellant)

-------------------------

(Transcript of the Handed Down Judgment by John Larking,

Chancery House, Chancery Lane, London WC2.

Telephone No. 071 404 7464.

 Official Shorthand Writers to the Court.)

-----------------------------------
MISS E. GLOSTER Q.C. and MR. R. GILLIS (instructed by Messrs.
Linklaters & Paines, London EC4) appeared on behalf of the
Plaintiff (Respondent).

MR. R. POTTS Q.C. and MR. R. SNOWDEN (instructed by Messrs
Nabarro Nathanson, London W1X) appeared on behalf of the
Defendant (Appellant).

------------------------

J U D G M E N T

(As approved)

-------------------------

2

© Crown Copyright

THE MASTER OF THE ROLLS: At issue in this appeal is the scope,
today, of the rule in Lumley v Gye (1853) 2 E & B 216. Does
it (as one side says) cover interference by a defendant with a
plaintiff's secondary right to relief against a third party?
Or is it limited (as the other side says) to cases where the
defendant has interfered with a plaintiff's primary right to
performance by the third party? The issue has never been
raised before and the authorities accordingly give no direct
answer to this conundrum.

The facts giving rise to the issue have been summarised
in the appellant's skeleton argument with admirable lucidity
and comprehensiveness and I adopt that summary almost
verbatim.
The first four defendants in this action ("the Russian
Companies") are companies incorporated in England which
formerly owned oil producing assets in the former Soviet
Union. Those assets were expropriated following the Bolshevik
revolution of 1917. In about 1928 each of the Russian
Companies
registered
with
H.M.
Government
claims
for
compensation in respect of the expropriated assets. The
claims were for amounts in excess of £27 million. Down to
1986 The Shell Petroleum Company Limited ("Shell") had a
controlling shareholding in each of the Russian Companies.
However, each of the Russian Companies also had several
hundred "outside" shareholders. None of the Russian Companies
had any substantial assets other than the compensation claims.

3

© Crown Copyright
 Shell provided administrative services to each company which
meant, in effect, that Shell was subsidising each company.

In 1984 Leisure Investments plc ("Leisure") approached
Shell with a view to acquiring Shell's interest in the Russian
Companies. The acquisition was to be made by a subsidiary of
Leisure,
namely
Leisure
Investments
(Overseas)
Limited
("Overseas"). The negotiations were protracted. Shell were
prepared to proceed but on the footing that :-

(1)Overseas was to offer to buy the shares of outside
shareholders on the same terms as it was to buy
Shell's shareholdings; and

(2)arrangements were to be made with the Russian
Companies
such
that
any
compensation
payments
received by the Russian Companies would pass to
Shell and the outside shareholders in proportion to
their interests before the sale of the shares to
Overseas.
Following such negotiations, in April 1986 Overseas made a bid
for the share capital of each of the Russian Companies and on
2 May 1986 the interested parties executed a series of
documents. Each Russian Company entered into an agreement
dated 2 May 1986 with (1) Leisure (2) Overseas and (3) Law
Debenture. These agreements are hereinafter described as "the
Compensation Agreements". In addition, also on 2 May 1986,
Law Debenture executed a trust deed which took the form of a
deed poll ("the Trust Deed").

The material terms of each of the Compensation Agreements

4

© Crown Copyright
were as follows :

(1)It was recited inter alia that the Russian Company
making the Compensation Agreement ("the relevant
company") had compensation claims, that an Offer
had been made on behalf of Overseas for the whole
of the issued share capital of the relevant
company, and that Law Debenture was the present
trustee of the trusts declared for the benefit of
(inter alia) the shareholders of the relevant
company by the Trust Deed.

(2)The relevant company agreed with Law Debenture that in
consideration of the payment of £250 to it by Law
Debenture the relevant company :

(a)would from time to time, and within 30 days of
the receipt of the compensation, pay to Law
Debenture sums measured by reference to the
amount of any compensation received by the
relevant
company
in
respect
of
the
compensation claims (i) within the period of
10 years after the date of the Compensation
Agreement or (ii) as a result of a claim
submitted pursuant to an Order in Council
under the Foreign Compensation Act 1950 made
within that period;

(b)would duly and promptly make and pursue any
claim for compensation in respect of the
compensation claims.

5

© Crown Copyright

(3)Law Debenture agreed with the relevant company to
retain a proportion of the sums received from the
relevant company pending final determination of the
amount of any tax payable by the relevant company
in respect of its receipt of the compensation, and
upon that final determination to repay to the
relevant company a sum measured by reference to
that amount.

(4)Each of Leisure and Overseas jointly and severally
undertook to and covenanted with Law Debenture :-

(a)to procure that the respective Russian Companies
complied with and performed any actions to be
taken in respect of their covenants in the
Compensation Agreements; and

(b)not to part with control of or to sell or
otherwise to dispose of any shares in the
Russian Companies acquired pursuant to the
offers
except
on
terms
that
any
buyer,
transferee or new controller entered into like
covenants,
mutatis
mutandis,
with
Law
Debenture.

The Trust Deed provided that Law Debenture would hold any
payment received from any of the Russian Companies pursuant to
the Compensation Agreement with that company on trust for the
persons who at the date of the Trust Deed were shareholders in
that company, the compensation payment being apportioned
between those persons according to their respective interests

6

© Crown Copyright
in the assets of that company on a winding up of that company
commencing on that date.

Following execution of the Compensation Agreements and
the Trust Deed and pursuant to the offers, Shell sold its
shares to Overseas. Many outside shareholders also accepted
the offers but a considerable number did not. On 14 December
1989 Leisure sold its 100% holding of the shares of Overseas
to Hilldon. On 15 December 1989 and 4 June 1990 the Russian
Companies received compensation in respect of the expropriated
assets. The total received was over £13 million. On 5 March
1990 Overseas transferred to Hilldon the shares which had been
acquired from Shell and from the outside shareholders who had
accepted the take-over offers. Overseas did not require
Hilldon to enter into any covenants with Law Debenture and
Hilldon did not do so.

On 20 June 1990 Caspian made a general take-over offer
for all shares in the issued share capital of each of the
Russian Companies. Hilldon and certain other shareholders in
the Russian Companies accepted Caspian's take-over offers. In
about October 1990 Hilldon gave effect to its acceptance by
transferring the shares held by it to Caspian.

Each of the Russian Companies has refused to make any
payment to Law Debenture in compliance with the terms of the
Compensation Agreements. The Russian Companies assert that
the arrangements were entirely invalid and illegal on a number
of grounds which need not be considered at this stage.

Law Debenture instituted this present action by writ

7

© Crown Copyright
issued on 15 November 1990. By writ issued on 22 March 1990
Shell sued their solicitors for negligence in respect of the
advice given by the solicitors in relation to the Compensation
Agreements, the Trust Deed and otherwise in relation to the
arrangements concluded in respect of the take-overs by
Overseas. Shell's action against the solicitors has now been
settled. A hearing is fixed for June to decide whether the
Compensation Agreements can be enforced.

Law Debenture's original claims against Hilldon and
Caspian,
which
were
not
parties
to
the
2
May
1986
arrangements, were set out in paragraphs 8 to 13 of the
original Statement of Claim. The effect of these claims can
be summarised as follows :-

(1)Leisure and Overseas jointly and severally undertook
to and covenanted with Law Debenture :-

(a)to procure that the respective Russian Companies
complied with and performed any actions to be
taken in respect of their covenants in the
Compensation Agreements; and

(b)not to part with control of or to sell or
otherwise to dispose of any shares in the
Russian Companies acquired pursuant to the
Overseas offer except on terms that any buyer,
transferee or new controller entered into like
covenants,
mutatis
mutandis,
with
Law
Debenture.

(2)Overseas breached the above covenants by transferring

8

© Crown Copyright
the shares in the Russian Companies to Hilldon.

(3)By causing or procuring or accepting the transfers,
Hilldon knowingly caused or procured or induced
Overseas to breach the relevant covenants.

(4)Alternatively, by causing or procuring or accepting
the
transfers,
Hilldon
itself
came
under
an
"implied collateral obligation" (which was said to
be contractual) to Law Debenture to observe and
perform the like covenants, mutatis mutandis, as
Overseas.

(5)In transferring the shares to Caspian, Hilldon acted
in breach of the supposed "implied collateral
obligation".

(6)By causing or procuring or accepting the transfers,
Caspian knowingly caused or procured or induced
Hilldon
to
breach
the
"implied
collateral
obligation".

(7)Alternatively, by causing or procuring or accepting
the
transfers,
Caspian
itself
came
under
an
"implied collateral obligation" (which was again
said to be contractual) to Law Debenture to observe
and perform the like covenants, as originally
imposed
upon
Overseas
and
as
allegedly
"transmitted" to Hilldon.

(8)Further or alternatively Caspian failed to comply with
its own alleged "implied collateral obligation" to
procure the Russian Companies to make payment to

9

© Crown Copyright
Law Debenture.

In 1991 Caspian applied for the claims against it to be
struck out in their entirety. In 1992 Hilldon applied for all
claims against it other than in relation to the claim in tort
under subparagraph (3) above to be struck out. On 9 March
1992 Hoffmann J held that the allegations by Law Debenture
against Hilldon (other than under subparagraph (3)) and
against Caspian disclosed no reasonable cause of action and
struck them out : [1993] 1 WLR 138 at 141D-148G. Hoffmann J
held (at 142G-H) that there were no grounds for implying any
contract between Law Debenture and either Hilldon or Caspian.

Law Debenture then applied for leave to amend the
Statement of Claim so as to add additional causes of action on
two bases ([1993] 1 WLR at 143A-C, 146E-G and 147H) :-

(1)that because Hilldon and thereafter Caspian took the
shares
with
knowledge
of
the
breach
of
the
Compensation Agreements by Overseas, they took the
shares subject to an obligation to perform the
covenants therein, either under the principle of De
Mattos v Gibson (1858) 4 De G. & J. 276, 282, or
under the principle that he who takes the benefit
of a transaction must also take the burden;

(2)that as an extension to the relief available to Law
Debenture as a consequence of Hilldon having
committed the tort of inducing a breach of contract
by Overseas, Law Debenture was entitled to an order
requiring Caspian to re-transfer the shares to

10

© Crown Copyright
Hilldon.

In the course of the same hearing Hoffmann J held on 9
March 1992 that these allegations disclosed no reasonable
cause of action and refused leave to amend. Put briefly, he
held :-

(1)that the principle in De Mattos applied only to the
grant of a negative injunction restraining a
purchaser
from
acting
inconsistently
with
covenants, but could not extend to Caspian which
was not proposing to do anything inconsistent with
the covenants given by Overseas to Law Debenture
(at 146A-B);

(2)that section 50 of the Supreme Court Act 1981 added
nothing as it presupposed as a condition to the
granting of damages "in substitution" for an
injunction that an injunction could have been
granted. As there were no grounds for an
injunction there are no grounds for damages either
(at 146D);

(3)that the principle of benefit and burden could not
apply where the right and burden arose under
different instruments; where the covenants entered
into
by
Overseas
with
Law
Debenture
were
unconnected with the transfers of shares to Hilldon
and Caspian; and where there was no inference from
the transfer of shares that either Hilldon or
Caspian was intended to assume the burden of the

11

© Crown Copyright
covenants given by Overseas to Law Debenture at
146G-147H);

(4)that in order to give the Court any jurisdiction to
make any injunctive order against Caspian, Law
Debenture had to have a cause of action against it.
 In addition to the fact that there was no cause of
action
in
contract,
or
under
the
equitable
principle in De Mattos as noted above, there was
also no cause of action against Caspian for the
tort
of
interfering
with
Law
Debenture's
contractual
relations
with
Overseas.

These
contractual
obligations
had
been
irretrievably
broken before Caspian appeared on the scene.
Accordingly there was no jurisdiction to grant an
injunction against Caspian on any of these grounds
(at 148C-G).

However, following a suggestion by Hoffmann J at the end
of the judgment on 9 March 1992 (which had not previously been
canvassed in argument between the parties - see [1993] 1 WLR
at 148H-149A and 150D), on 29 September 1992 Law Debenture
sought leave to amend the Statement of Claim for a second time
to add a new cause of action in tort. The proposed amendment
is included in paragraph 11 of the Amended Statement of Claim.
 It alleges :-

"In the premises by causing or procuring or accepting
such transfers [from Hilldon to Caspian], Caspian ...
knowingly, intentionally and/or wrongfully:-

12

© Crown Copyright

(a)rendered ineffective or sought to render ineffective
the potential claim by the Plaintiff against
Hilldon for the re-transfer of the shares in the
Russian Companies to Leisure Overseas so that
Leisure Overseas would be able, or could be
ordered, to comply with and perform its obligations
[under the Compensation Agreements]; and/or

(b)interfered with or sought to interfere with the
remedies available to the Plaintiff against Leisure
Overseas
and/or
Hilldon
for
the
breaches
of
contract [by Leisure Overseas] and/or for the
tortious conduct of Hilldon [in inducing a breach
of contract by Overseas]."
The relief sought against Caspian is identified in paragraph 2
of the Prayer :-

"(a) Damages;

(b)Further or alternatively, a Mandatory Injunction that
Caspian do forthwith transfer or re-transfer to
Leisure Overseas, alternatively, that Caspian do
forthwith transfer or re-transfer to Hilldon and
that Hilldon do thereupon forthwith transfer or re-
transfer to Leisure Overseas all such shares in the
Russian Companies now held by Caspian as were
originally acquired by Leisure Overseas pursuant to
the Offers...or subsequently acquired... in right
of such shares;

(c)Further or alternatively, damages pursuant to Section

13

© Crown Copyright
50 of the Supreme Court Act 1981 in addition to or
in substitution for such injunctive relief."

In his judgment of 9 March 1992, Hoffmann J approached
the proposed amendment as one which sought to extend the scope
of the principle in Lumley v Gye (1853) 2 E & B 216 beyond
interference with contractual relations to interference with
remedies arising out of a broken contract. He readily
accepted that there was no authority supporting any such
liability (at 148H). In his judgment delivered on 2 November
1992 Hoffmann LJ commented that although the principle in
Lumley v Gye is normally termed "procuring a breach of
contract" it is in fact a wider principle. He cited the
following formulation of Erle J in Lumley v Gye (at 232) :-
"It is clear that the procurement of the violation of a right
is a cause of action in all instances where the violation
is an actionable wrong".
He then proceeded to set out what he concluded were the three
essential elements to the tort. They were:-

(1)a right in the plaintiff;

(2)violated by an actionable wrong;

(3)procured by the defendant.
He stated that the rights capable of being violated and giving
rise to a tort have been held to include rights conferred by
statute and fiduciary obligations imposed in equity, such as a
company director's duty of fidelity to the company. He
referred (at 151C-E) to what he characterised as a "debatable
extension" to the principle that the actionable wrong must

14

© Crown Copyright
involve an actual breach of contract (or of statutory duty or
of an equitable obligation), namely that the actionable wrong
could be extended to non-performance by the contracting party
which does not involve a breach of contract, and held (as is
accepted) that this "debatable extension" was not relevant in
the instant case. He then referred in passing to the
extension of the concept of procurement to include knowingly
entering into a transaction inconsistent with the contracting
party's obligation (at 151E-F), which he accepted as well-
established. Having made these three points, the judge
concluded that the general principle in Lumley v Gye (and also
that formulated by Ralph Gibson LJ in F v Wirral Metropolitan
Borough Council [1991] Fam 69 at 107) was wide enough to cover
a case in which the right of the plaintiff which had been
violated was the secondary right of the plaintiff to a remedy
arising out of the antecedent tortious inducement of a breach
by a third party of its primary obligation under a contract
(at 151F-H). In using that language he borrowed and adapted
Lord Diplock's well known analysis of contractual obligations
in Photo Production Limited v Securicor Transport Limited
[1980] AC 827, 848. This analysis itself developed earlier
observations of Lord Diplock in Moschi v Lep Air Services
Limited [1973] AC 331 at 350-1. The judge accordingly ruled
that the facts pleaded in the draft amended statement of claim
gave rise to a cause of action in tort against Caspian and he
gave leave to amend.

Against this second decision Caspian now appeal. There

15

© Crown Copyright
is no appeal against the earlier decision and no appeal by
Hilldon (who were not represented before us). The sole
question is whether Law Debenture's amended statement of claim
discloses a cause of action in tort against Caspian.

Law Debenture's argument in support of the judge's
decision proceeded by a series of steps, some of which were
challenged and some of which were not. I hope the steps are
fairly summarised as follows :
(1) Law Debenture had a primary contractual right against
Overseas requiring that company not to part with the
shares save to a transferee bound by the same covenants
as itself. This was common ground. Plainly Law
Debenture was entitled to due performance of the May 1986
agreements by the other parties to them.
(2)Hilldon was under a primary duty in tort to Law
 Debenture not to interfere with Law Debenture's primary
contractual right against Overseas. This was so on a
simple application of Lumley v Gye, and Hilldon never
challenged that allegation in Law Debenture's original
pleading. In accepting a transfer of the shares Hilldon
infringed Law Debenture's right and so became liable to
Law Debenture in tort. This also was common ground.
(3) Having tortiously interfered with Law Debenture's primary
contractual right to performance by Overseas, Hilldon
became subject to a secondary liability to pay damages to
Law Debenture. This proposition was not challenged.
(4) As a tortfeasor, Hilldon also became subject to a

16

© Crown Copyright
personal liability to undo the consequences of its tort.
 The transfer to it could have been restrained before it
was made. After it was made, Hilldon could and on
appropriate facts would be ordered to re-transfer the
shares to Overseas. This step of the argument depended
on the decision of Bridge J in Esso Petroleum Co Limited
v Kingswood Motors (Addlestone) Limited [1974] QB 142.
Caspian did not challenge the correctness of that
decision or throw doubt on the court's jurisdiction to
order re-transfer by Hilldon to Overseas. But it did
contend that Law Debenture had no legal right to have the
shares re-transferred and that Hilldon was subject to no
legal duty to re-transfer them unless and until the court
made the necessary order.
(5) Law Debenture's right to injunctive relief against
Hilldon, although a secondary right, was no less a right
recognised and entitled to protection in law than a
primary right. Caspian did not accept this.
(6) Law Debenture's right was matched by duties on Hilldon, a
positive duty to re-transfer the shares to Overseas and a
negative duty not to transfer the shares elsewhere and so
put it out of its power to perform its positive duty.
Caspian challenged this.
(7) Hilldon's transfer of the shares to Caspian was a breach
of
these
duties
and
accordingly
amounted
to
the
commission of a tort additional to and independent of the
tort committed at step (2) above. Thus by making the

17

© Crown Copyright
transfer Hilldon committed an actionable wrong. This was
the proposition which Caspian most strongly sought to
refute.
(8) By accepting the transfer from Hilldon in this situation,
with the requisite knowledge and intention, Caspian also
violated
Law
Debenture's
right
and
was
itself
a
tortfeasor guilty of an actionable wrong. It was
therefore properly joined as a defendant on this ground.
 Caspian rejected this conclusion.

I embark on consideration of the legal issues in this
case with a strong inclination towards the conclusion at which
the judge arrived. It is alleged that Overseas, Hilldon and
Caspian were at all material times under common control and
Caspian does not deny that it had full knowledge of the terms
of the contract between Law Debenture and Overseas and of the
nature and effect of the transaction between Overseas and
Hilldon. Denial of a remedy against Caspian might, as the
judge observed (at 151G), allow the introduction of an
additional company under the same control as the original
contract-breaker to provide an easy escape from the salutary
remedy devised by Bridge J in Kingswood Motors. The suspicion
must exist that these transfers were designed, all along, to
deprive the majority shareholders in the Russian Companies of
the benefit for which alone they were willing to part with
their shares. No attempt has however been made in this action
to pierce the corporate veil which protects Hilldon and
Caspian, and we must resist the temptation to speculate on

18

© Crown Copyright
other claims which might perhaps have been made by Law
Debenture. We must rule on the legal issues raised. It seems
to me that these are essentially twofold :

(1)Does the rule in Lumley v Gye apply to the right which
Law Debenture asserts (as in steps (4) and (5)
above) against Hilldon?

(2)Did the transfer between Hilldon and Caspian amount to
an actionable wrong by either of them?

(1) The right

Many of the cases dealing with the application of Lumley
v Gye have referred to contractual rights, because the cases
were concerned with alleged inducement or procurement of
contractual breaches. But Erle J's original formulation was
not so limited (at 232) :
"It is clear that the procurement of the violation of a right
is a cause of action in all instances where the violation
is an actionable wrong, as in violations of a right to
property, whether real or personal, or to personal
security : he who procures the wrong is a joint wrong-
doer, and may be sued, either alone or jointly with the
agent, in the appropriate action for the wrong complained
of".

Early summaries of the rule accepted this. Thus in Quinn v
Leathem [1901] AC 495 at 510 Lord Macnaghten said :
"Speaking for myself, I have no hesitation in saying that I
think the decision was right, not on the ground of
malicious intention - that was not, I think, the gist of
the action - but on the ground that a violation of legal
right committed knowingly is a cause of action, and that
it is a violation of legal right to interfere with
contractual relations recognised by law if there be no
sufficient justification for the interference".

The present state of the law is in my judgment well summarised
by Professor John Fleming in The Law of Torts (8th edn, 1992)

19

© Crown Copyright
at pages 689-90, where he writes :
"Since then the action has been actively promoted by the
courts. Leaving behind its original link with personal
service, it now applies to every kind of contractual
relation, including purely commercial. Viewed as an
illustration of the generalisation that unjustified
"violation of a legal right committed knowingly is a
cause of action", it is now wide enough to include even
civil rights existing independently of contract: thus it
would be an actionable wrong to induce a common carrier
to refuse, in breach of his common law duty, goods
tendered to him for carriage. More doubtful is the role
of the action for vindicating non-economic relations; it
has been denied for the right of parental access in
custody disputes because it would likely be exploited for
spiteful litigation and is better left to matrimonial
proceedings."

I would not be willing to hold that interference with a
secondary right to a remedy (as opposed to a primary right to
performance) could never attract the application of the Lumley
v Gye principle. For example, if, following default by the
principal debtor, a third party induced a guarantor to
dishonour his secondary obligation to pay the creditor, I
would need much persuasion that the third party was not liable
in tort. But it does not seem to me to follow that a third
party is necessarily liable in tort for any interference with
any right properly regarded as secondary, particularly where
that right is contingent. So I think it is perhaps preferable
to
avoid
elaborate
analysis
of
secondary
rights
and
obligations and instead to ask, perhaps at the price of some
circularity, whether violation of the right in question is an
actionable wrong.

(2) The wrong

It is not in dispute that Hilldon could, on timely
application, have been ordered to re-transfer the shares to

20

© Crown Copyright
Overseas and restrained from transferring them on to Caspian
or anyone else. It is said that Hilldon could only be
restrained from acting unlawfully and that it would not be
liable to such restraint if such onward transfer were lawful.
 Therefore onward transfer is to be regarded as unlawful, as
violating Law Debenture's right that it should not take place.
 As a party to this onward transfer Caspian are party to the
unlawfulness and so liable.

To my mind this chain of reasoning harbours a fallacy.
It is of course true that the courts restrain the commission
of unlawful acts such as threatened breaches of contract or
torts or breaches of trust and grant mandatory orders for the
doing of things which it would be unlawful not to do. But all
injunctive orders are not of this kind. The court will
restrain a defendant and potential judgment debtor from making
himself judgment-proof by dissipating his assets and may order
him to give disclosure of assets in support of the injunction.
 But the defendant violates no legal right of the plaintiff if
he makes himself judgment-proof by dissipating his assets
before he is enjoined from doing so and he does not act
unlawfully in failing to give disclosure before he is ordered
to do so. These are measures the court adopts to protect the
efficacy of its orders. The Kingswood Motors injunction was,
I think, of a similar kind.

Caspian can be liable to Law Debenture if and only if
Hilldon's transfer of the shares to it was tortious. But at
the time this transfer was made Hilldon was the full legal and

21

© Crown Copyright
beneficial owner of the shares. It had no contractual
relationship of any kind with Law Debenture. It was liable to
Law Debenture for its tortious conduct in procuring Overseas'
breach of its contract with Law Debenture, but that was all.
It was open to Law Debenture to seek an interlocutory
injunction restraining Hilldon from making onward transfer and
a final injunction ordering re-transfer, but application had
not been made and injunctions had not been granted. Until
some injunction was granted, Hilldon was in my judgment
entitled to do what it would with its own. I cannot regard
the onward transfer as an actionable wrong, and it would in my
view defeat the ingenuity of any pleader to frame a plausible
statement of claim based on that transfer alone.

Mr Robin Potts QC for Caspian criticised the judgment of
Hoffmann LJ on the ground that although the judge listed an
actionable wrong as one of the ingredients of the cause of
action he failed to identify any relevant actionable wrong on
the part of Hilldon and Caspian. That seems to me a fair
criticism. In concentrating on the right, it seems to me that
the judge did take his eye off the wrong.

I would accordingly allow Caspian's appeal, refuse Law
Debenture leave to amend and dismiss this action against
Caspian.
LORD JUSTICE BELDAM: In the circumstances set out fully in the
judgment of the Master of the Rolls, did the appellants,
Caspian, commit the common law tort of actionable interference
with the contractual rights of the plaintiffs, Law Debenture?

22

© Crown Copyright
 The elements of the tort were stated by Jenkins L.J. in
D.C. Thomson & Co. Ltd. v. Deakin [1952] Ch. 646. At page 696
he said:

"Nevertheless, I think that in principle an actionable
interference with contractual relations may be committed
by a third party who, with knowledge of a contract
between two other persons and with the intention of
causing its breach, or of preventing its performance,
persuades, induces or procures the servants of one of
those parties, on whose services he relies for the
performance of his contract, to break their contracts of
employment with him, either by leaving him without notice
or by refusing to do what is necessary for the
performance of his contract, provided that the breach of
contract between the two other persons intended to be
brought about by the third party does in fact ensue as a
necessary consequence of the third party's wrongful
interference with the contracts of employment."
 As Lord Diplock pointed out in Merkur Island Corporation
v. Laughton [1983] 2 AC 570 at page 607, the only interference
with contractual rights relied on by the plaintiff in D.C.
Thomson & Co. Ltd. v. Deakin (supra) was procuring a breach by
a third party of a contract between the third party and the
plaintiff. But Lord Diplock said that Jenkins L.J., though
using the expression "breach", was not intending to confine
the tort of actionable interference with contractual rights to
the procuring of such non-performance of primary obligations
under a contract as would necessarily give rise to secondary
obligations to make monetary compensation by way of damages.
He said:

"All prevention of due performance of a primary obligation
under a contract was intended to be included even though
no secondary obligation to make monetary compensation
thereupon
came
into
existence
because
the
second
obligation was excluded by some force majeure clause.

If there were any doubt about this matter, it was resolved in

23

© Crown Copyright
1969 by the judgment of the Court of Appeal in Torquay
Hotel Co. Ltd. v. Cousins [1969] 2 Ch. 106. That was a
case in which the contract the performance of which was
interfered with was one for the delivery of fuel. It
contained a force majeure clause excusing the seller from
liability for non-delivery of delayed, hindered or
prevented by (inter alia) labour disputes. Lord Denning
M.R. stated the principle thus, at page 138:

"there must be interference in the execution of a
contract. The interference is not confined to the
procurement of a breach of contract. It extends to
a case where a third person prevents or hinders one
party from performing his contract, even though it
be not a breach." (The emphasis is that of Lord
Denning)."
 Thus it is an actionable tort knowingly to interfere with
another's right to performance of a contractual obligation by
preventing or hindering the other party from performing his
obligations under the contract and as Lord Diplock in Merkur
Island Shipping Corp. v. Laughton (supra) said of the common
law tort of interfering with the trade or business of another
person by doing unlawful acts:

"To fall within this genus of torts the unlawful act need not
involve procuring another person to break a subsisting
contract or to interfere with the performance of a
subsisting contract." (p. 609)
 The type of case was described by Viscount Radcliffe in
Stratford v. Lindley [1965] AC 269 at 328 as:

"One in which the defendants have inflicted injury on the
plaintiffs in the conduct of their business and have
resorted to unlawful means to bring this about. It
cannot be denied that to induce breaches of contract is
to employ unlawful means."
 The question in the present case is whether the action of
Caspian in taking a transfer of shares from Hilldon which

24

© Crown Copyright
could impede the plaintiff's rights against Hilldon can be
categorized as unlawful means.
 In the present case the plaintiff has asserted a cause of
action against Hilldon alleging that by accepting the
transfers of the shares in the Russian companies with
knowledge of the terms of the agreements, it caused or
procured Leisure Overseas to breach its covenants with the
plaintiff. Hilldon does not dispute that this allegation
discloses a cause of action.
 Although at the material time Leisure Overseas, Hilldon
and Caspian are alleged to have been under common control, it
is not suggested that there was in this case a conspiracy to
injure the plaintiffs nor that Caspian was party to Hilldon's
conduct constituting the tort of interfering with the
plaintiff's contractual rights.
 The plaintiff originally attempted to base claims against
Caspian on Caspian's action in taking a transfer of the shares
in the Russian companies from Hilldon. The plaintiff argued
that Caspian then became liable to perform the covenants
either by implication or by the principle formulated by
Knight-Bruce L.J. in De Mattos v. Gibson [1858] 4 De G & J
276, or alternatively that in law or equity Caspian could not
take the benefit of the shares without assuming the burden of
the covenants. For the reasons given by the learned judge he
held that the plaintiffs had failed to make out a cause of
action against Caspian on any of these grounds. Finally the
plaintiff claimed as an extension of the relief available for

25

© Crown Copyright
the tort of inducing a breach of contract a mandatory order
first against Caspian to re-transfer the shares to Hilldon and
then against Hilldon to re-transfer them to Leisure Overseas.
 The learned judge rejected these claims. Against Hilldon
such an order was no longer possible because it had
transferred its shares to Caspian and against Caspian the
plaintiff could demonstrate no independent cause of action on
which to found jurisdiction in the court to make an injunctive
order. The judge decided the plaintiff had not demonstrated a
cause of action in tort against Caspian. Caspian had not
played any part in inducing Leisure Overseas to break its
covenant to the plaintiff and accordingly no arguable case had
been raised that Caspian had interfered with the plaintiff's
contractual rights. But the learned judge added:

"The effect of the transfer to Caspian was not to interfere
with contractual relations but to deprive the plaintiff
of the remedy which it would have had for the inducement
of the earlier breach of contract by Hilldon. It
rendered ineffective the potential claim to a retransfer
of the shares."
 Thus the question was raised whether interference with
contractual rights extends to interference with or hindrance
of remedies available for a breach of contract, and the scene
was set for the final amendment which is the subject of this
appeal.
 The judge held that the general principle that "where
there is a right the law gives a remedy" and that knowingly
entering into a transaction inconsistent with a contracting
party's obligations as the defendant had done in the case of

26

© Crown Copyright
British Motor Trade Association v. Salvadori [1949] Ch. 556
established a general principle wide enough to cover a case in
which the plaintiff could show that it had been prevented or
impeded from exercising a secondary right to a remedy
available for the tortious inducement of a breach by a third
party of its primary obligation under a contract. Holding
that on grounds of policy there were no reasons to deny the
suggested extension of the cause of action, he allowed the
amendment.
 Mr Potts Q.C. argues that the proposed amendment
discloses no actionable wrong because the test for an
actionable wrong arising from breach of a primary right is
whether the plaintiff can maintain an action in respect of the
relevant Act. There was no direct interference with the
performance of an obligation which the plaintiff was entitled
to expect from Leisure because no right of the plaintiff was
violated by the sale of the shares in the Russian Companies by
Hilldon to Caspian. Nor was there any indirect interference
with such obligations because there was no independently
unlawful act on the part of Caspian in taking a transfer of
the shares from Hilldon.
 The plaintiff supports the learned judge's decision that
the plaintiff had a right to performance of the secondary
obligation by Hilldon which it could enforce by seeking a
mandatory restoratory injunction. The circumstances were
similar to those in which Lord Bridge (then Bridge J.) granted
an injunction in Esso Petroleum Co. Ltd. v. Kingswood Motors

27

© Crown Copyright
(Addlestone) Ltd. and Others [1974] 1 QB 142. In that case
Lord Bridge granted a mandatory order against the second and
third defendants ordering them to reconvey property which they
had procured to be transferred to them in direct breach of the
first defendant's contractual obligations to the plaintiff.
 Lord Bridge, however, emphasised the discretionary nature
of the remedy of mandatory injunction. See page 157.
 The Master of the Rolls has listed the steps in the
argument of Miss Gloster Q.C. for the plaintiff. In essence
her argument was that by accepting a transfer of the shares
from Hilldon, Caspian had interfered with the plaintiff's
right to obtain a mandatory injunction against Hilldon or
alternatively
had
prevented
or
hindered
Hilldon
from
performing a correlative obligation to retransfer the shares
to Leisure.
 Insofar as the plaintiff's argument depends upon the
analysis of the contractual obligations as primary or
secondary by Lord Diplock in Photo Productions Ltd. v.
Securicor and which arise by implication from the terms of the
contract at common law, it is not irrelevant that Lord Diplock
began his exposition at page 848 by saying:

"Leaving aside those comparatively rare cases in which the
court is able to enforce a primary obligation by
decreeing specific performance of it, breaches of primary
obligations give rise to substituted or secondary
obligations on the part of the party in default and, in
some cases, may entitle the other party to be relieved
from further performance of his own primary obligations."
 A party whose contract can give rise to a claim for
specific performance in equity may nevertheless prefer to

28

© Crown Copyright
claim damages for breach. Although a court will not decree
specific performance of some contracts, for example contracts
of service, it may grant injunctions to restrain conduct which
is inconsistent with the performance of primary contractual
obligations. I can see the force of the argument that, if a
plaintiff can obtain an injunction to restrain action
inconsistent with the performance of a contractual obligation,
he ought equally to be able to obtain an injunction to
restrain a third party from procuring action inconsistent with
his primary right to performance of the obligations under the
contract. That is because the third party is threatening to
commit a tort which is actionable. Equally, if as in the case
of Acrow (Automation) Ltd. v. Rex Chainbelt [1971] 3 AER 1175,
it is to be regarded as unlawful to do an act which amounts to
contempt of court because it interferes with the rights of a
party who has obtained an injunction, it is difficult to see
why it should not similarly be regarded as unlawful to do acts
which might prevent or hinder the obtaining of an injunction.
 But I am not persuaded that an act, otherwise lawful but
which to the knowledge of the person doing it might prevent a
third party from seeking equitable relief against breach of a
primary obligation under a contract, is in itself capable of
giving rise to a cause of action in tort.
 The claimed extension of the cause of action would appear
to be confined to equitable remedies
arising
from
breach
of
primary
obligations.

Although
a
secondary

29

© Crown Copyright
obligation to pay damages will on Lord
Diplock's analysis arise, the right to
claim
equitable
relief
by
way
of
injunction
is
conditional
upon
the
secondary obligation being inadequate to
vindicate the plaintiff's primary right.
 Injunctions compelling the performance
of positive obligations have much in
common
with
specific
performance,
excluded from Lord Diplock's analysis.
So have mandatory restorative injunctions
which compel the undoing of a wrong.
They are remedies which a plaintiff may
seek from the court, either to compel
performance of a primary obligation or to
restrain
the
defendant
from
actions
inconsistent with the primary obligations
under the contract. In my view they are
not themselves secondary rights arising
by implication from the terms of the
agreement. Whilst I consider that, if an
injunction had been obtained by the
plaintiffs against Hilldon, action taken
by Caspian which prevented or impeded
Hilldon from complying with its terms
would under the principle in the case of
Acrow v. Rex Chainbelt (supra) have

30

© Crown Copyright
amounted to an unlawful act actionable by
the plaintiff, until such an injunction
had been obtained the transfer of the
shares from Hilldon to Caspian and their
acceptance by Caspian was not actionable
by
the
plaintiff
and
therefore
not
tortious. I accordingly agree with the
Master of the Rolls that the appeal
should be allowed.
LORD JUSTICE SAVILLE: For the purposes of the appeal it is
assumed that the Hilldon, by taking an unencumbered transfer
of shares from Overseas, committed the tort of inducing
Overseas to break a legal contractual obligation owed by the
latter to the Plaintiffs not to make any such transfer.
Caspian were not party to this tort, but afterwards took a
transfer of the shares from Hilldon. It is also assumed for
the purpose of this appeal that Caspian procured Hilldon to
make this further transfer in order to put it out of the power
of the Plaintiffs to seek an order requiring Hilldon to
transfer the shares back to Overseas, by way of a remedy for
the tort committed by Hilldon.

The Plaintiffs have pleaded that this act of inducement
by Caspian was a itself a tort. They accept that in order to
sustain this pleading they must establish that what Caspian
procured Hilldon to do was something unlawful ie a violation
of a legal right of the Plaintiffs.

Miss Gloster QC for the Plaintiffs submitted that when
Hilldon committed the first tort, that company came under a
legal obligation to the Plaintiffs to make recompense for that
tort. The Plaintiffs therefore had a correlative legal right
to such recompense, which included a right to have the shares
transferred back to Overseas. Caspian procured Hilldon to put
it out of their power to perform this obligation, by the

31

© Crown Copyright
further transfer of the shares. Miss Gloster submitted that
the transfer must have been an unlawful act on the part of
Hilldon, since the Plaintiffs, had they known that it was
about to take place, could have obtained a permanent
injunction to restrain it, on the grounds that in consequence
of the tort they had the right to require the shares to be
returned whence they came: see Esso Petroleum Co. Ltd v
Kingswood Motors(Addlestone) Ltd [1974] QB 142. A permanent
injunction will only issue to prohibit acts which the law
categorizes as unlawful. Thus it must follow that the transfer
was an unlawful act. Since it was knowingly procured by
Caspian, all the relevant ingredients of a tort by Caspian are
present.

Mr Potts QC for Caspian submitted that the transfer by
Hilldon was not an actionable wrong, and that only unlawful
acts that are actionable wrongs can form the basis of the tort
under consideration. The transfer of the shares from Hilldon
to Caspian was not in itself an actionable wrong. The
Plaintiffs could not sue Hilldon and obtain a retransfer of
the shares without relying on a different actionable wrong,
namely the procurement of the transfer from Overseas. The
latter actionable wrong was one for which it is not alleged
that Caspian were responsible.

In my judgment this is not conclusive. It seems to me
that the basis of the tort is that it is wrong to procure
another to do something unlawful by way of a violation of the
rights of the plaintiff. The fact that what is done is
unlawful by reason of some prior unlawfulness seems to me to
be neither here nor there. Two wrongs do not make a right. For
my own part I would respectfully accept and adopt the
proposition of Lord MacNaughton in Quinn v Leatham [1901] AC
495 at 510, that unjustified "violation of a legal right
committed knowingly is a cause of action". The question
therefore is whether Caspian did knowingly violate a legal
right of the Plaintiffs by procuring Hilldon to transfer the
shares.

32

© Crown Copyright

The suggested legal right in the present case must be (if
anything) what has been described as a secondary right, to
distinguish it from the primary legal right to performance of
the contract or other primary legal obligation. If the primary
obligation is not performed then as a matter of law there
arises a right to recompense. In the context of contract, for
example, the contracting parties make promises to each other.
It is their primary obligation to perform those promises. To
the extent that they fail to do so, the primary obligation is
(subject to contractual provisions to the contrary) replaced
by a secondary obligation to make recompense for the breach.
Both
primary
and
secondary
obligations
give
rise
to
correlative rights and I accept that both can properly be
described as legal rights and obligations.

In the present case the suggested legal right is the
secondary right to obtain an order against Hilldon for the
return of the shares. Mr Potts submitted that until such an
order was actually obtained, it was not unlawful for Hilldon
to dispose of the shares, so that in truth at the material
time there was no violation of the Plaintiffs' legal rights.

Mr Potts supported this submission by examining the case
of another secondary right, namely that of damages. If the
Plaintiffs were right in contending that there was a violation
of a legal right in the present case, then the same would
follow where, before a Mareva Injunction was obtained, a third
party procured the defendant to dissipate his assets. This,
submitted Mr Potts, cannot be right, for the defendant only
acts unlawfully, in violation of the plaintiffs' secondary
right to damages, if he seeks to dissipate his assets after
the grant of a Mareva. Given this is the position, a third
party procuring the defendant to dissipate his assets before
the grant of a Mareva is not procuring the doing of anything
unlawful at all.

Not without some doubts I am convinced by this argument.
It might be suggested that there is some distinction between a
Mareva injunction and the type of injunctive relief under

33

© Crown Copyright
discussion in the present case. It could be said that Mareva
relief is not by way of recognizing and enforcing a secondary
right to damages, but a means of protecting the value of that
right, by way of temporarily creating a new right and
obligation in respect of the defendant's assets. In other
words, a Mareva injunction is not (unlike the injunction under
consideration) the remedy for an existing wrong, but a means
of temporarily preserving that remedy. Since the right does
not exist until a Mareva injunction is granted there is indeed
no question of the defendant being under any pre-existing
legal obligation with regard to his assets so that a third
party would not be violating any right of the plaintiff by
procuring their disposal before a Mareva was granted.

This distinction has some attractions, but in my view it
contains a logical flaw. The Plaintiffs have to assert that
they had the right, from the time of the original tort, to an
injunction requiring Hilldon to transfer back the shares. An
injunction is a discretionary remedy. As to this the
Plaintiffs submit that on the pleaded facts the Court would
have exercised its discretion in their favour. Thus they
assert the existence of a legal right and obligation predating
the grant of such an Injunction. However, by exactly the same
process of reasoning, a plaintiff who has all the material
required to obtain a Mareva injunction could say that he too
therefore has a right (and the defendant a corresponding
obligation) with regard to the defendants' assets even before
a Mareva was granted; yet it seems to me clear that this
cannot be the law.

In the end therefore I am driven to the conclusion that
the fallacy in the Plaintiffs' argument lies in the assertion
that to dispose of the shares before an order was made
prohibiting this and requiring their return, amounts to a
violation of the Plaintiffs' legal rights. It seems to me that
the right asserted by the Plaintiffs only arises when the
Court makes the order in question.

For these reasons I too would allow this appeal, refuse

34

© Crown Copyright
leave to amend and dismiss the action against Caspian.

Order: Appeal allowed with costs. Leave to appeal to the
House of Lords refused.
