Long v Tower Hamlets London Borough Council [1996] EWHC Ch 1 (20
March 1996).docx

SCBAILII_CASE_PROPERTY
BAILII Citation Number: [1996] EWHC Ch 1
Chancery Division
 20 March 1996
B e f o r e :
James
Munby
Q.C.
____________________
Between:

LONG

V

TOWER
HAMLETS
LONDON
BOROUGH
COUNCIL
____________________
Philip Walter (instructed by Wallace Bogan) appeared for the plaintiff; Sarah
Hargreaves (instructed by the solicitor to the Tower Hamlets London Borough Council)
represented the defendants.
____________________
1. Giving judgment, Mr James Munby QC said: This case raises the question what is
meant by the words 'tenancy from year to year or other period, without a lease in writing'
in para 5(1) of Schedule 1 to the Limitation Act 1980. It also, at least on one view of
the matter, raises the question what is meant by the words 'creation by parol of leases
taking effect in possession for a term not exceeding three years' in section 54(2) of the
Law of Property Act 1925 - a question which, in turn, involves consideration of the law
relating to reversionary leases. Both questions are of some interest and importance.
2. The matter comes before me on an appeal by the plaintiff, Ronald James Long ('Mr
Long'), from an order made by Deputy Master Wall on September 26 1995. The master
had before him an application by the defendants, Tower Hamlets London Borough
Council (the 'council'), by summons dated March 21 1995 to strike out the originating
summons which the plaintiff had issued on January 13 1995. The master struck out the
originating summons on the ground that Mr Long's claim was doomed to fail.
Facts
3. The facts which are relevant to the main question that I have to decide lie within a very
narrow compass. The dispute relates to the ground-floor shop ('the shop') and a

Long v Tower Hamlets London Borough Council [1996] EWHC Ch 1 (20
March 1996).docx
2

maisonette on the upper floors ('the maisonette') at 21 Turners Road, Tower Hamlets,
London E3 ('the premises'). The premises are part of the property registered at Her
Majesty's Land Registry under title number 255264. On September 4 1975 agents
acting for the then owner of the premises, a Mr Jacobs, wrote a letter to Mr Long in the
following terms:
Dear Sir,
21 Turners Road E3
Ground Floor
We confirm on behalf of our client, Mr H Jacobs, that we are prepared to grant you a quarterly
tenancy of the above upon the following terms:
1 The rent to be £ 55 per quarter, payable on the usual quarter days in advance, exclusive of
general and water rates payable in respect of this part of the property.
2 The premises are to be held by R J Long, Esq, trading as Long Bros, Upholstery, in connection
with his business as an upholsterer.
3 The tenant is not to sublet the whole or any part of the premises.
4 The tenant is to maintain the interior and shop front in good decorative repair and condition.
5 The tenant is to give four weeks notice in writing before vacating the premises.
6 The tenancy is to commence on Monday, the 29th September 1975
on a quarterly basis.
Yours faithfully,
4. On September 8 1975 Mr Long made the following endorsement on a copy of the letter:
I, Ronald James Long, agree to abide by the terms and conditions of the tenancy set out herein
Signed R J Long
Date 8-9-75
5. The copy letter endorsed by Mr Long ('the tenancy document') was returned to the
landlord. It was retained by the landlord and his successors in title, being eventually
produced from their files by the council after the present litigation had been
commenced.
6. On or about September 29 1975 Mr Long took possession of the shop. On September
24 1976 Mr Jacobs' successor in title completed the sale of the freehold of the premises
to the Greater London Council ('GLC'). On October 13 1976 GLC were registered as
proprietors of the premises. In or about September 1983 GLC gave Mr Long notice to
quit the shop; the notice expired on March 25 1984. On August 25 1988 the freehold of

Long v Tower Hamlets London Borough Council [1996] EWHC Ch 1 (20
March 1996).docx
3

the premises was transferred under statutory powers to the council as the successor
authority to GLC. The council have since been registered as proprietor of the premises.
Issues
7. It is common ground that Mr Long has paid no rent for the shop for many years.
According to Mr Long he stopped paying rent in 1977. The council accept that rent has
been neither demanded nor paid since March 1984. When precisely rent was last paid
is a matter which can only be resolved at trial. Mr Long claims to have taken possession
of the maisonette in 1977 at a time when, he says, it was unoccupied. The council, on
the other hand, have produced documents which prima facie establish that the
maisonette was lawfully occupied by a Mr Taylor as tenant of GLC until February 20
1978, when he was rehoused by GLC elsewhere. Precisely when and to what extent Mr
Long ever made use of the maisonette is in dispute between the parties, as is the extent
to which he has, in recent years, been in occupation of the shop. These also, however,
are matters which can only be resolved at trial.
8. At trial the case will turn on the application to the facts, whatever they may be found to
be, of section 15(1) and (6) of, and paras 5 and 8 of Schedule 1 to, the Limitation Act
1980. Section 15(1) and (6) is in the following terms:
(1) No action shall be brought by any person to recover any land after the expiration of twelve
years from the date on which the right of action accrued to him or, if it first accrued to some
person through whom he claims, to that person… .
(6) Part I of Schedule 1 to this Act contains provisions for determining the date of accrual of
rights of action to recover land in the cases there mentioned.
Para 5 of Schedule 1 provides as follows:
(1) Subject to sub-paragraph (2) below, a tenancy from year to year or other period, without a
lease in writing, shall for the purposes of this Act be treated as being determined at the
expiration of the first year or other period; and accordingly the right of action of the person
entitled to the land subject to the tenancy shall be treated as having accrued at the date on which
in accordance with this subparagraph the tenancy is determined.
(2) Where any rent has subsequently been received in respect of the tenancy, the right of action
shall be treated as having accrued on the date of the last receipt of rent.
9. Para 8(1) of Schedule 1 provides that:
No right of action to recover land shall be treated as accruing unless the land is in the possession
of some person in whose favour the period of limitation can run (referred to below in this
paragraph as 'adverse possession'); and where under the preceding provisions of this Schedule
any such right of action is treated as accruing on a certain date and no person is in adverse
possession on that date, the right of action shall not be treated as accruing unless and until
adverse possession is taken of the land.
10. Mr Long's case is simple. He says that he is and has been ever since 1977 continuously
in possession of the whole of the premises (that is, of both the shop and the maisonette);
that he has paid no rent since 1977 for any part of the premises and has, ever since then,

Long v Tower Hamlets London Borough Council [1996] EWHC Ch 1 (20
March 1996).docx
4

been in adverse possession of the premises within the meaning of para 8(1); that in
accordance with para 5(2) the GLC's right of action to recover the premises is to be
treated as having accrued at the latest by January 1 1978; and that, in consequence, any
claim by the council to recover the premises became statute-barred, in accordance with
section 15(1), at the latest by January 1 1990, some five years before the present
proceedings were commenced. On this footing Mr Long seeks: (i) a declaration that he
is entitled beneficially to the premises; and (ii) rectification of the proprietorship
register of title no 255264 to remove the premises from that title and to open a new title
for the premises under which he is the registered proprietor.
11. The council deny that Mr Long can prove either the factual possession or the animus
possidendi which are necessary to found adverse possession: Buckinghamshire County
Council v Moran [1990] Ch 623. Moreover, the council say that Mr Long last paid rent
in March 1984, less than 12 years before the proceedings were commenced on January
13 1995. Accordingly, say the council, their claim to recover the premises is not yet
statute-barred.
12. As I have already said, the factual disputes between the parties can only be resolved at
trial. On what basis, therefore, do the council seek to strike out Mr Long's claim? Three
arguments are put forward by Miss Sara Hargreaves of counsel on behalf of the council.
Each, in substance, proceeds on the footing that, whatever may be the eventual
resolution of the factual disputes to which I have referred, there are other grounds on
which the council can establish that time cannot on any view have begun to run in Mr
Long's favour until 1984 at the earliest.
13. Before considering Miss Hargreaves' arguments there is one preliminary matter which
I must address. It will be appreciated that the tenancy document related only to the shop.
There is no suggestion that Mr Long was ever granted a tenancy of the maisonette or
that he has ever paid any additional rent for the maisonette. On what basis, then, does
Miss Hargreaves seek to resist Mr Long's claim in so far as it relates to the maisonette?
She relies upon the principle that if a tenant occupies land belonging to the landlord but
not included in the demise, that land is presumed to be an addition to the land demised
to the tenant, so that it becomes subject to the terms of the tenancy and must therefore
be given up to the landlord when the tenancy ends: Smirk v Lyndale Developments
Ltd [1975] Ch 317*. Mr Philip Walter of counsel, on behalf of Mr Long, seeks to
confine the principle, which otherwise he accepts, in two ways: first, he says it is limited
to cases where the encroachment is on land which is waste; second, he says that it is
limited to cases where the tenant is estopped by words or conduct from denying that
the additional land is within the demise. Neither condition, he says is satisfied in the
present case.
14. I cannot accept either of Mr Walter's submissions. In Smirk v Lyndale Developments
Ltd [1975] Ch 317, Pennycuick V-C considered all the relevant authorities, which as he
said at p323G had got into something of a tangle, and concluded at pp324G, 329C,
332G that the law had been correctly stated by Alderson and Parke BB
in Kingsmill v Millard (1855) 11 Exch 313. His decision on the point was not
challenged on appeal and was accepted as correct by the Court of Appeal: [1975] Ch
317, at pp337G, 340E, 341H. The law as laid down in those two cases I take to be clear
and binding on me. They show that the principle applies whether or not the land
encroached upon is waste. They show, moreover, that the principle is based on a

Long v Tower Hamlets London Borough Council [1996] EWHC Ch 1 (20
March 1996).docx
5

presumption, albeit a rebuttable presumption, which, although it may be considered to
operate in a manner akin to an estoppel, is not dependent upon proof, as Mr Walter I
think would have it, of any active representation to the landlords by the tenant. On the
contrary, the presumption is treated as applying unless the tenant, during the term,
communicates with the landlords in such a way as to show that he is asserting his own
title as against the landlords or, as Alderson B put it, that he is setting the landlords at
defiance. There is nothing in the evidence before me in the present case which even
begins to suggest that Mr Long, in his dealings with the GLC and the council, ever
sought to distinguish between the shop and the maisonette or ever sought to assert that,
while he occupied the shop as tenant, his occupation of the maisonette was in some
different character. Accordingly, in my judgment, Miss Hargreaves is entitled to say
that, on the evidence as it stands, the presumption is wholly unrebutted and that the
principle as laid down in Smirk v Lyndale Developments Ltd applies. It follows that, for
present purposes, no distinction is to be drawn between Mr Long's claim as it relates to
the shop and his claim as it relates to the maisonette.
15. I turn therefore to consider the three issues identified by Miss Hargreaves as justifying
the striking out of Mr Long's claim.
Issue 1 - 'lease in writing'
16. In the first place, and this is her principal argument, Miss Hargreaves submits that the
tenancy document is a 'lease in writing' within the meaning of para 5(1) of Schedule 1
to the Limitation Act 1980; that time accordingly did not begin to run in favour of Mr
Long when he stopped paying rent (whenever that was) but only when his tenancy was
brought to an end by notice to quit; and that the only relevant notice to quit was that
which expired on March 25 1984, less than 12 years before the commencement of the
present proceedings.
17. Mr Walter denies that the tenancy document is, or as a matter of law is capable of being,
a 'lease in writing' within the meaning of para 5(1). Put shortly, his argument can be
summarised as follows:
(a) A document cannot be a 'lease in writing' within the meaning of para 5(1) unless it is
dispositive, that is, as Mr Walter put it in argument, the document must be one which at law
creates, of and by itself, a leasehold estate in land.
(b) As the tenancy document was not executed as a deed, it could take effect as a lease only if
fell within the exception in section 54(2) of the Law of Property Act 1925, that is, if it '[took]
effect in possession' for a term not exceeding three years. It did not, says Mr Walter, because
it took effect, if at all, as a reversionary lease.
18. At first blush the use in para 5(1) of the words 'tenancy from year to year or other period,
without a lease in writing' is rather puzzling to anyone familiar with the scheme of the
Law of Property Act 1925 and its distinction between those leases which are required
by section 52 to be made by deed and those leases which section 54(2) permits to be
created by parol, in other words without the need even for writing. The provisions of
the Law of Property Act 1925 itself are also, at first, rather puzzling. Notwithstanding
the reference in section 52(2)(d) to 'leases or tenancies … not required by law to be
made in writing', the Act does not itself, so far as I am aware, require any class of lease
to be made in writing, though certain leases made under the Settled Land Act 1925

Long v Tower Hamlets London Borough Council [1996] EWHC Ch 1 (20
March 1996).docx
6

which would otherwise be required by section 42(1)(i) of that Act to be made by deed
are permitted by section 42(5)(ii) to be made by writing under hand.
(1) Historical background
19. The explanation for the seeming oddities is historical. As Mr Walter pointed out, para
5 of Schedule 1 to the Limitation Act 1980 reproduces provisions first enacted as
section 8 of the Real Property Limitation Act 1833 and later re-enacted as section 9(2)
of the Limitation Act 1939. Section 8 of the Real Property Limitation Act 1833
provided as follows:
And be it further enacted, That when any Person shall be in Possession or in Receipt of the
Profits of any Land, or in Receipt of any Rent, as Tenant from Year to Year or other Period,
without any Lease in Writing, the Right of the Person entitled subject thereto, or of the Person
through whom he claims, to make an Entry or Distress or to bring an Action to recover such
Land or Rent shall be deemed to have first accrued at the Determination of the first of such
Years or other Periods, or at the last Time when any Rent payable in respect of such Tenancy
shall have been received (which shall last happen).
20. As Mr Walter also pointed out, the context in which the Real Property Limitation Act
1833 was enacted was that of the Statute of Frauds 1677. However, in order to
understand the exceedingly interesting and instructive arguments that have been so
skilfully deployed by Mr Walter and Miss Hargreaves it is necessary to go even further
back than that and to consider, albeit briefly, the relevant principles of the common law.
21. At common law a lease could be granted in any way, even orally: Megarry and
Wade, The Law of Real Property, 5th ed 1984, at p636. Moreover, there was at common
law no restraint upon the grant of a reversionary lease, that is, a lease to take effect in
reversion on some future day, however distant, and conferring no right to take
possession in the meantime. Such a lease (to be contrasted with a concurrent lease, that
is, a lease of the reversion: Megarry and Wade at pp664--665) gave the lessee an
immediate vested legal interest in the land, that interest being known as an interesse
termini, though until the date when the lease was due to take effect this interest was
vested in interest and not in possession. On the other hand, the lessee under a
reversionary lease acquired no estate in the land until he had actually entered, that is,
taken possession in accordance with the lease; until then all he had was an interesse
termini: Megarry and Wade at pp231, 637, 647--648.
22. In 1677 the Statute of Frauds was enacted 'For Prevention of many fraudulent Practices,
which are commonly endeavoured to be upheld by Perjury and Subornation of Perjury'.
Section 1 of the Statute of Frauds provided that:
all Leases, Estates … or Terms of Years … made or created by Livery and Seisin only, or by
Parol, and not put in Writing, and signed by the Parties so making or creating the same, or their
Agents thereunto lawfully authorised by Writing, shall have the Force and Effect of Leases or
Estates at Will only, and shall not either in Law or Equity be deemed or taken to have any other
or greater Force or Effect; any Consideration for making any such Parol Leases or Estates, or
any former Law or Usage, to the contrary notwithstanding.
23. Section 2 of the Statute of Frauds excepted from the operation of section 1:

Long v Tower Hamlets London Borough Council [1996] EWHC Ch 1 (20
March 1996).docx
7

all Leases not exceeding the Term of Three Years from the making thereof, whereupon the
Rent reserved to the Landlord, during such Term, shall amount unto Two third Parts at the least
of the full improved Value of the Thing demised.
24. Section 4 of the Statute of Frauds provided, so far as is material, that:
no Action shall be brought … to charge any Person … upon any Contract or Sale of Lands, …
or any Interest in or concerning them … unless the Agreement upon which such Action shall
be brought, or some Memorandum or Note thereof, shall be in Writing, and signed by the Party
to be charged therewith, or some other Person thereunto by him lawfully authorized.
25. Accordingly, when the Real Property Limitation Act 1833 was enacted the distinction
was not, as it now is, between those leases required to be made by deed and those which
may be created by parol, but rather between those leases required by section 1 of the
Statute of Frauds to be 'put in Writing' and those which, by virtue of section 2 of the
Statute of Frauds, could still be created at common law by parol.
26. The modern requirement of a deed was first imposed by section 4 of the Transfer of
Property Act 1844, which provided:
That no Lease in Writing of any … Land … shall be valid as a Lease … unless the same shall
be made by Deed; but any Agreement in Writing to let … any such Land shall be valid and
take effect as an Agreement to execute a Lease …; and the Person who shall be in the
Possession of the Land in pursuance of any Agreement to let may, from Payment of Rent or
other Circumstances, be construed to be a Tenant from Year to Year.
27. The drafting of section 4 of the Transfer of Property Act 1844 was soon perceived to
have been defective: see Tress v Savage (1854) 4 E & B 36, at p43, per Coleridge J.
Section 4 was therefore repealed by section 1 of the Real Property Act 1845. Section 3
of the latter Act provided:
That … a Lease, required by Law to be in Writing, … shall … be void at Law, unless made by
Deed:
28. Sections 1, 2 and 4 of the Statute of Frauds remained in force.
29. Thus from 1845 the combined effect of the Statute of Frauds and the Real Property Act
1845 was that those leases which, prior to the Transfer of Property Act 1844, had been
required by section 1 of the Statute of Frauds to be in writing were now required by
section 3 of the Real Property Act 1845 to be made by deed; but that those leases which
had been excepted by section 2 of the Statute of Frauds from the operation of section 1
of the Statute of Frauds remained excepted from the operation of section 3 of the Real
Property Act 1845.
30. Although the effect of section 3 of the Real Property Act 1845 was to make a written
lease which did not fall within section 2 of the Statute of Frauds 'void', that did not
deprive the written document of all legal effect. At law, as soon as the tenant took
possession, and rent was paid and accepted, a yearly or other periodic tenancy arose.
That periodic tenancy was a legal estate which was treated as being held on such of the
terms set out in the written document as were applicable to and not inconsistent with a
periodic tenancy: Tress v Savage (1854) 4 E & B 36; Martin v Smith (1874) LR 9 Exch

Long v Tower Hamlets London Borough Council [1996] EWHC Ch 1 (20
March 1996).docx
8

50. In equity the imperfect lease was treated as a contract to grant a lease and, moreover,
provided there was valuable consideration and a sufficient act of part performance, a
contract of which specific performance would, in principle, be granted under the rule
in Parker v Taswell (1858) 2 De G & J 559 and Walsh v Lonsdale (1882) 21 ChD 9.
31. Sections 1 and 2 of the Statute of Frauds and section 3 of the Real Property Act 1845
were replaced by sections 52 and 54 of the Law of Property Act 1925. Section 4 of the
Statute of Frauds, so far as is material, was replaced by section 40 of the Law of
Property Act, itself since repealed by section 2(8) of the Law of Property
(Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1989. Section 52 of the Law of Property Act 1925,
replacing section 3 of the Real Property Act 1845, provides so far as is material, as
follows:
(1) All conveyances of land or of any interest therein are void for the purpose of conveying or
creating a legal estate unless made by deed.
(2) This section does not apply to NL …
(d) leases or tenancies or other assurances not required by law to be made in writing;
32. 'Conveyance' is defined by section 205(1)(ii) of the Law of Property Act 1925 as
including a lease. Section 54 of the Law of Property Act 1925, replacing sections 1 and
2 of the Statute of Frauds, is in the following terms:
(1) All interests in land created by parol and not put in writing and signed by the persons so
creating the same, or by their agents thereunto lawfully authorised in writing, have,
notwithstanding any consideration having been given for the same, the force and effect of
interests at will only.
(2) Nothing in the foregoing provisions of this Part of this Act shall affect the creation by parol
of leases taking effect in possession for a term not exceeding three years (whether or not the
lessee is given power to extend the term) at the best rent which can be reasonably obtained
without taking a fine.
33. The words 'taking effect in possession' are not defined as such, though 'Term of years
absolute' is defined by section 205(1)(xxvii) of the Law of Property Act 1925 in such a
way as to distinguish a 'term of years taking effect in possession' from a 'term of years
taking effect in reversion':
'Term of years absolute' means a term of years (taking effect either in possession or in reversion
whether or not at a rent) …
34. 'Possession' is defined by section 205(1)(xix) of the Law of Property Act 1925 as
including receipt of rents or profits or the right to receive the same.
35. It will be observed that sections 52 and 54 of the Law of Property Act 1925 follow very
closely, and in large part perpetuate the language of, their statutory precursors. As is
pointed out in Megarry and Wade at p637:
The provisions of the two previous Acts were repeated by the Law of Property Act 1925 but
with certain alterations. No attempt has been made to state the combined effect of the earlier

Long v Tower Hamlets London Borough Council [1996] EWHC Ch 1 (20
March 1996).docx
9

Acts: section 54 follows the Statute of Frauds 1677 and section 52 follows the Real Property
Act 1845 so that their differing provisions still stand side by side. This is presumably because
they had become so familiar that it was thought best to preserve them.
36. Thus sections 52(2)(d) and 54(1) preserve fossilised references to leases in writing
which, though they may reflect the formal requirements imposed in 1677 by the Statute
of Frauds (and still representing the law when the Real Property Limitation Act 1833
was enacted), had been overtaken by the formal requirement of a deed imposed by the
Transfer of Property Act 1844.
37. However, as is also pointed out in Megarry and Wade at p637, and as appears from a
comparison of section 54(2) of the Law of Property Act 1925 with section 2 of the
Statute of Frauds, section 54(2) did make two changes. The first, on which nothing
turns for present purposes, was to substitute for the reference in the Statute of Frauds
to a rent not less than two-thirds of the full improved value reference to the best rent
reasonably obtainable without taking a fine. The second, which is crucial to Mr Walter's
argument, was to substitute for the reference in the Statute of Frauds to a lease not
exceeding three years 'from the making thereof' reference in section 54(2) to a lease
'taking effect in possession' for a term not exceeding three years.
38. The Law of Property Act 1925 made two other changes to the law which are material
for present purposes: first, section 149(1) and (2) abolished the doctrine of interesse
termini and the rule that a lessee took no estate until he had actually entered; second,
section 149(3) limits to 21 years the time that may elapse before the term under a
reversionary lease begins; a reversionary lease postponed for more than 21 years is
void. The effect of section 149, therefore, is to give the lessee under a reversionary
lease, so long as it is not postponed for more than 21 years, an immediate estate, rather
than a mere interest, in the land - though until the date when the lease is due to take
effect that estate will be vested in interest only and not in possession.
(2) Para 5(1) - 'lease in writing'
39. Before the master Mr Walter argued that, notwithstanding the use of the words 'lease
in writing', the exception under para 5(1) of Schedule 1 to the Limitation Act 1980
applies only if the lease has been made by deed. That submission, which, in my
judgment, is clearly wrong, was not pursued before me. Mr Walter and Miss Hargreaves
were at one in agreeing that the word 'writing' in para 5(1) has the meaning given to it
by section 5 of and Schedule 1 to the Interpretation Act 1978:
'Writing' includes typing, printing, lithography, photography and other modes of representing
or reproducing words in a visible form, and expressions referring to writing are construed
accordingly.
40. I agree. A written document does not have to be a deed in order to be a 'writing' for the
purposes of para 5(1), though on the other hand, a document which is a deed will also
be a 'writing' for the purposes of para 5(1).
41. As I have said, Mr Walter's argument is that a document is not a 'lease in writing' unless
it is dispositive, that is, a document which at law creates, of and by itself, a leasehold
estate in land. A document which is merely an agreement for a lease, or merely
evidential of the terms of a lease is not, he submits, a 'lease in writing'. Miss Hargreaves'

Long v Tower Hamlets London Borough Council [1996] EWHC Ch 1 (20
March 1996).docx
10

submission is that this is much too subtle and technical an approach. She contends for
a simple and practical approach, suggesting that the reason why para 5(1) distinguishes
between those leases which are, and those leases which are not, 'in writing' is evidential.
She asserts, I have no doubt correctly, that Mr Long acquired, at the latest when he took
possession and started paying rent on or about September 29 1975, a periodic tenancy
at law and that that tenancy is to be treated at law as having been held on the terms of
the tenancy document. She says, again no doubt correctly, that equity would in principle
treat the tenancy document as a specifically enforceable agreement for a lease, so that
Mr Long had what is often called an equitable lease. Thus far, I did not understand Mr
Walter to challenge Miss Hargreaves' analysis of the effect of the tenancy document in
the events which had happened. So, says Miss Hargreaves, there plainly was a lease, all
the terms of the lease are to be found set out in a written document, and there is,
therefore, a 'lease in writing'. It is, says Miss Hargreaves, as simple and straight forward
as that. No, says Mr Walter, Miss Hargreaves' argument does not go far enough. She
has to show that the tenancy agreement itself was dispositive and created a legal estate
in land. An equitable lease is not, he says, a lease and does not of itself create an estate
in land.
42. In my judgment, Mr Walter's submission on this point is correct.
43. In the light of the historical background, and bearing in mind the familiar distinction,
drawn for example in sections 9 and 7 of the Statute of Frauds (now sections 53(1)(c)
and 53(1)(b) of the Law of Property Act 1925), between those transactions required to
be 'in' writing, that is, where the writing required by the statute is dispositive, and those
requiring only to be 'manifested and proved by some writing', that is, where the writing
required by the statute need be no more than evidential, one's initial impression is that
the 'writing' referred to in para 5(1) of Schedule 1 to the Limitation Act 1980 must be
dispositive and not merely evidential. Para 5(1), after all, refers to a 'lease in writing'
(emphasis supplied). Indeed, as a matter of simple English language, that is what one
would expect the words to mean.
44. But the matter does not rest there, because I have been referred to two authorities which,
in my judgment, indicate that this is indeed the correct meaning of the words. In Doe d
Landsell v Gower (1851) 17 QB 589 the question was whether an entry in a vestry-
book, signed by the tenant and by one, but not by all, of the parish officers, was a 'lease
in writing' within the meaning of section 8 of the Real Property Limitation Act 1833. It
was held by the Court of Queen's Bench (Patteson, Coleridge and Wightman JJ) that it
was not, because only one of the parish officers had signed the vestry-book and he had
not professed to sign on behalf of all. The facts of the case were very far removed indeed
from the facts of the present case, but the reasons given by the judges for arriving at
their decision are apposite. They are all to the same effect. Patteson J at p598 made it
clear that, in his opinion, what section 8 required was an … 'actual lease', that is
… not … a document, generally, but … a lease; … something which is to pass an interest.
45. Coleridge J at p599 said that what section 8 required was
… a lease in writing: that is, not merely an instrument which would be evidence of the
conditions of holding, but one passing an interest.
46. Wightman J at p600 said that section 8

Long v Tower Hamlets London Borough Council [1996] EWHC Ch 1 (20
March 1996).docx
11

… requires an instrument in writing that may operate as a lease.
47. In my judgment, this is clear authority for the proposition that there was no 'lease in
writing' for the purposes of section 8 of the Real Property Limitation Act 1833, and
thus there is no 'lease in writing' for the purposes of para 5(1) of Schedule 1 to the
Limitation Act 1980, if the 'writing' is merely evidential. If there is to be a 'lease in
writing' the writing must itself at law 'pass an interest' (to use the words of Patteson and
Coleridge JJ) and 'operate as a lease' (to use Wightman J's words).
48. Moses v Lovegrove [1952] 2 QB 533, the only other authority on the point to which I
was referred, is to the like effect. One of the questions in that case was whether a rent
book was a 'lease in writing' within the meaning of section 9(2) of the Limitation Act
1939. The Court of Appeal held that it was not. Sir Raymond Evershed MR said at
p536:
The alleged lease in writing consisted of the rent book, which was put in evidence. The judge
rejected the view that the rent book was such a lease in writing within the meaning of the Act,
and I think he was entirely right in that conclusion.
The rent book is, I think, what it purports to be, and what it is called, a rent book, that is, a book
containing acknowledgements for payment of weekly sums of rent, and containing also, in
pursuance of the terms of the legislation, a reference to the conditions on which the tenant was
holding his tenancy. I think that on the face of it, it was not intended to be, and is not a contract
for granting a tenancy, still less a lease creating an estate. It is, I think, at most what it was
intended to be, and what it is on the face of it called, a book evidencing the terms on which the
tenant held.
49. Romer LJ at p543 said that he entirely agreed with the Master of the Rolls.
50. These authorities make it clear, in my judgment, that a written document, whatever its
terms, however clearly referable to the existence of a lease, and however
comprehensive it may be in setting out the terms of the lease, is not a 'lease in writing'
for the purposes of para 5(1) of Schedule 1 to the Limitation Act 1980 unless at law the
document itself operates to 'pass an interest' (the words used by Patteson and Coleridge
JJ), itself 'operates as a lease' (the words used by Wightman J) or itself 'creates an estate'
(the words used by Sir Raymond Evershed MR).
(3) Section 54 (2) - 'taking effect in possession'
51. That being so, the next question which arises is whether the tenancy document operated
to create a leasehold estate. It plainly did not take effect as a deed. The question
therefore is whether or not it operated in accordance with section 54(2) of the Law of
Property Act 1925 as a 'lease taking effect in possession for a term not exceeding three
years'.
52. Mr Walter accepts that, notwithstanding the reference in section 54(2) to the creation
of leases 'by parol', a lease which otherwise satisfies the requirements of section 54(2)
can be created either by parol or in writing. This is plainly correct: see, for
example, Wright v Macadam [1949] 2 KB 744, at p747 per Jenkins LJ; Kushner v Law
Society [1952] 1 KB 264, at p272 per Lord Goddard CJ. Mr Walter concedes that the
tenancy document, properly construed, purported to take effect as a tenancy and not as

Long v Tower Hamlets London Borough Council [1996] EWHC Ch 1 (20
March 1996).docx
12

a mere agreement to grant a tenancy: Rollason v Leon (1861) 7 H & N
73; Hand v Hall (1877) 2 ExD 355. He also accepts that the tenancy document, since it
stipulated for a quarterly tenancy, was for a 'term not exceeding three years' as that
phrase is used in section 54(2).
53. However, submits Mr Walter, the tenancy did not 'tak[e] effect in possession' and the
tenancy document was therefore not, as required by section 54(2), a lease taking 'effect
in possession'. Although the tenancy document was executed on September 8 1975, the
tenancy was not to commence immediately but rather on a future date, September 29
1975, and Mr Long had no right to take possession until the latter date. Therefore, says
Mr Walter, it took effect, if at all, as a reversionary lease. Whatever may have been the
position at common law or prior to 1925, he says, the inclusion in section 54(2) of the
words 'taking effect in possession' has the effect of excluding altogether from the ambit
of section 54(2) reversionary leases conferring no immediate right to take possession.
Thus, he submits, a reversionary lease can only take effect if made by deed. If that is
right then it follows, says Mr Walter, that a reversionary lease cannot be a 'lease in
writing' for the purposes of para 5(1) of Schedule 1 to the Limitation Act 1925 unless
it is made by deed. Mr Walter submits that the only tenancy which ever came into
existence in the present case was not one created by the tenancy document. It arose, he
says, by operation of law as a result of Mr Long taking possession on or about
September 29 1975 and paying rent. The tenancy document, says Mr Walter, is not a
lease. It is no more than a document whose terms, so far as they are consistent with a
periodic tenancy, will be treated as the terms on which Mr Long held the periodic
tenancy which arose by operation of law on or about September 29 1975.
54. Miss Hargreaves, on the other hand, disputes that reversionary leases were excluded
from the exception in section 2 of the Statute of Frauds or that they are excluded from
the ambit of section 54(2). She accepts that the three-year period, referred to both in
section 2 of the Statute of Frauds and in section 54(2), provides what she calls the basic
measure of computation, and that the computation of the three-year period is from the
date of the parol grant. But that, according to Miss Hargreaves, is the only limit imposed
by section 54(2). The fundamental principle, common both to section 2 of the Statute
of Frauds and to section 54(2), she says, is: the term whether it is to commence
immediately or at some date in the future, must take effect in possession within three
years from the date of the parol grant and must not extend beyond three years from the
date of the parol grant. So long as it satisfies this condition it matters not, she submits,
whether the term takes effect in possession at the date of the parol grant. It is implicit
in this argument that the words 'taking effect in possession' in section 54(2) are
descriptive only of the quality of the lease at the date when the term commences and
not of the quality of the lease at the date of the parol grant. She suggests that the
restrictions on the grant of reversionary leases are to be found in section 149 of the Law
of Property Act 1925, and not in section 54(2).
(a) Statute of Frauds
55. Before turning to consider the question as it arises in relation to section 54(2) I must
first examine certain older authorities on section 2 of the Statute of Frauds. The first
case is Rawlins v Turner (1699) 1 Ld Raym 736. The report is very short:

Long v Tower Hamlets London Borough Council [1996] EWHC Ch 1 (20
March 1996).docx
13

No lease by parol is good which imports to convey an interest for more than three years from
the time of the making.
It was ruled by Holt Chief Justice at Lent Assizes at Kingston 1699, that such lease for three
years of land, as will be good without deed within the [Statute of Frauds] … s2, must be for
three years, to be computed from the time of the agreement; and not for three years to be
computed from any day after.
56. The second case is Ryley v Hicks (1725) 1 Stranage 651. Again the report is very short:
In Middlesex, coram Raymond, Chief Justice.
Leases by parol for less than three years from the making, to commence at a future day, are not
within Statute of Frauds… .
The plaintiff declares, that 24 February 1723, she demised to the defendant a chamber, a cellar,
and half a shop, habendum from LadyDay then next for a quarter of a year, and so from quarter
to quarter, so long as both parties shall please, at 51. per quarter.
It was objected by Whitaker, that this being to commence at a future day, was but a lease at
will since the Statute of Frauds. The Chief Justice at first thought it a good objection, but upon
farther consideration he was of opinion, that the exception was not confined to leases that were
to commence from the time of making, but was general as to all leases that were not to hold for
above three years from the making. So the plaintiff had a verdict …
57. The case is also reported in Buller's Nisi Prius 6th ed at p177:
A lease by parol for a year and an half, to commence after the expiration of a lease which wants
a year of expiring, is a good lease within the statute of frauds, for it does not exceed three years
from the making.
58. It will be seen that the two reports differ in their summary of the relevant facts. As
observed in Selwyn, An Abridgment of the Law of Nisi Prius, 13th ed 1869, vol 2 at
p759, the report in Strange is 'probably from a different note'. But the statement of
principle is the same in both reports.
59. Ryley v Hicks was criticised by Dampier J in Inman v Stamp (1815) 1 Stark 12,
reported on this point only in Selwyn at p759 (the earlier proceedings at nisi prius are
reported, but on a different and for present purposes irrelevant point, as Inman v Stamp:
In Inman v Stamp BR Trin 55 Geo III., Dampier, J, said the practice had been with the
foregoing case of Ryley v Hicks, although he rather inclined to think that the 2nd section of the
statute [of frauds], taken with section 4 [of the statute of frauds], was confined to leases
executed by possession, on which two-thirds of the improved rent was reserved.
60. In Edge v Strafford (1831) 1 Cr & J 391 it was argued that Ryley v Hicks had in effect
been over-ruled by Inman v Stamp. The argument was rejected at p396 by Bayley B,
giving the judgment of the Court of Exchequer, who appears to have
treated Ryley v Hicks as good authority for the proposition that:
a lease, though it were to commence in futuro, would be within the exception in the statute of
frauds, if it did not exceed three years from the making.

Long v Tower Hamlets London Borough Council [1996] EWHC Ch 1 (20
March 1996).docx
14

61. A similar argument in Lord Bolton v Tomlin (1836) 5 Ad & El 856 fared little better,
though the court in that case managed to avoid deciding, or even expressing any opinion
on, the point.
62. In Hand v Hall (1877) 2 ExD 355 an agreement was made on January 26 1876 for a
tenancy until Midsummer 12 months from February 14 1876. It was held by the Court
of Appeal, reversing the Exchequer Division, that the agreement operated as a devise
within the exception in section 2 of the Statute of Frauds. As was pointed out in
Foa, The Relationship of Landlord and Tenant, 6th ed 1924, at p11, the decision of the
Court of Appeal is consistent only with the view that Ryley v Hicks was correctly
decided, although that case seems not to have been referred to and the contrary appears
not to have been argued.
63. The next case to which I was referred is Foster v Reeves [1892] 2 QB 255. In that case
an agreement was made on May 12 1890 for a tenancy for three years to commence on
June 24 1890 and thereafter from year to year until determined. The landlord sued to
recover rent after the tenant had given up possession. It seems to have been common
ground that there was no lease at law, and the argument in the Court of Appeal was as
to the power of the county court, under the legislation then in force, to grant specific
performance of the agreement under the rule in Walsh v Lonsdale (1882) 21 ChD 9.
Each of the judges, however, referred, albeit briefly, to the position at law. Lord Esher
MR said at p257:
When the agreement is looked at, it is found that it assumes to create a tenancy for three years
to begin at a subsequent date. Such a tenancy can at common law only be created by deed …
If, therefore, we look to the common law alone, this claim cannot be supported.
64. Fry LJ said at pp258--259:
… it was a sum which could be recovered in equity, provided the agreement under which it
was claimed was one that would be enforced by a court of equity. Independently of this, there
was no right to sue for it.
65. Lopes LJ said at p259:
By the joint operation of the Statute of Frauds and … [the Real Property Act 1845], a lease for
more than three years must be by deed. Here the agreement purports to create a term of more
than three years, and it is clear that rent could not, at common law, have been recovered under
that agreement.
66. At first, Mr Walter was minded to argue that Lord Esher MR's observations (though
not, he accepted, those of Lopes LJ) were authority for the proposition that a tenancy
to begin at a subsequent date could at law only be created by deed. On reflection, and
having considered Ryley v Hicks (1725) 1 Stranage 651, Mr Walter accepted that this
was not what Lord Esher MR had meant. In my judgment, Mr Walter was entirely
correct to make that concession. When Lord Esher MR said at p257 that 'Such a tenancy
can at common law only be created by deed', the tenancy he was referring to was, as
the immediately preceding words make clear, 'a tenancy for three years, to begin at a
subsequent date' (emphasis supplied). Read thus, Lord Esher MR was making the same
point as Lopes LJ, and indeed the very same point that had been made by Lord Holt CJ
as long ago as 1699: a tenancy for three years to commence at a future date was not

Long v Tower Hamlets London Borough Council [1996] EWHC Ch 1 (20
March 1996).docx
15

within section 2 of the Statute of Frauds, and thus at law could only be made in writing
from 1677 or, from 1844, by deed. This was not because the tenancy was to commence
at a future date, for Ryley v Hicks shows that, even after the enactment of the Statute of
Frauds, there was nothing objectionable in that. It was because the tenancy was to last
for a period expiring more than three years from the date of the agreement, and it had
been established by Rawlins v Turner (1699) 1 Ld Raym 736 that such a lease fell
outside the exception in section 2. There is, in my judgment, nothing
in Foster v Reeves to suggest that the Court of Appeal was seeking to overturn
established authority, although in that case, as previously in Hand v Hall (1877) 2 ExD
355, Ryley v Hicks seems not to have been referred to Foster v Reeves is, therefore, in
my judgment, no authority for the proposition that, after the enactment of the Real
Property Act 1845, a lease for less than three years to commence at a future date could
at law only be created by deed.
67. Be that as it may, the matter appears to have been resolved the following year
in Parker v Briggs, a decision of the Court of Appeal reported only, and there rather
inadequately, in (1893) 37 Sol Jo 452:
the appellants contend … that a parol lease to commence at a future date was in point of law
and in fact an agreement for a lease, and as such must be in writing under section 4 of the
Statute of Frauds, even though the lease agreed to be granted were for a less period than three
years (Edge v Strafford 1 Cr & J 391) … The court, however, decided against the appellants
…, two of the learned judges holding that it was possible to create a parol lease to commence
in the future (Ryley v Hicks Stra 651) …
68. Accordingly, Mr Walter was, in my judgment, correct not to press the argument that,
after the enactment of the Real Property Act 1845, a lease to commence at a future date,
could at law only be created by deed, even if it would otherwise fall within the exception
in section 2 of the Statute of Frauds. The contrary is, in my judgment, clear from the
authorities to which I have referred. That Ryley v Hicks (1725) 1 Stranage 651
remained good law until the coming into force of the Law of Property Act 1925 appears,
moreover, to have been the general view of the commentators: see Halsbury's Laws of
England, 1st ed 1911, vol 18, at p384, para 830; Foa, The Relationship of Landlord and
Tenant, 6th ed 1924, at p11; Redman, The Law of Landlord and Tenant, 8th ed 1924,
at pp121, 439--440.
69. It follows, in my judgment, that prior to the coming into force of the Law of Property
Act 1925 Mr Walter's argument would have failed. So far as concerns the effect of the
exception in section 2 of the Statute of Frauds, Miss Hargreaves correctly relies
upon Rawlins v Turner (1699) 1 Ld Raym 736 and Ryley v Hicks (1725) 1 Stranage
651 to make good her submissions. Unless, therefore, the effect of section 54(2) of the
Law of Property Act 1925 was, as Mr Walter asserts, to change the law as previously
laid down in Ryley v Hicks, the tenancy document will, as it seems to me, constitute a
'lease in writing' for the purposes of para 5(1) of Schedule 1 to the Limitation Act 1980.
70. Before turning to consider the meaning of section 54(2) there is another aspect of the
Statute of Frauds on which Mr Walter placed some reliance and to which I must briefly
advert. Cases such as Inman v Stamp (1815) 1 Stark 12, Edge v Strafford (1831) 1 Cr
& J 391 and Lord Bolton v Tomlin (1836) 5 Ad & El 856 show that if there was an oral
letting in futuro for less than three years from the date of the agreement there was no

Long v Tower Hamlets London Borough Council [1996] EWHC Ch 1 (20
March 1996).docx
16

remedy in contract, though an action could be brought on the lease once possession had
been taken, so that what had previously been a mere interesse termini had become an
estate in the land. The reason for the divergent treatment was, as Mr Walter points out,
that such an oral transaction was caught, qua contract, by section 4 of the Statute of
Frauds but, falling as it did within the exception in section 2, was not caught, qua lease,
by section 1 of the Statute of Frauds. As Mr Walter observes, the law as formulated in
particular in Edge v Strafford was unsatisfactory in treating very differently the
enforceability of the same transaction qua contract and qua demise. Given that the
exception in section 2 of the Statute of Frauds extended to oral demises, it could be a
fine point whether a particular oral transaction was a mere agreement, and thus wholly
unenforceable by virtue of section 4, or a demise, and thus effective qua lease under the
exception in section 2.
(b) Section 54(2)
71. As I have already mentioned, the words 'taking effect in possession' which appear in
section 54(2) of the Law of Property Act 1925 were not to be found in section 2 of the
Statute of Frauds. There appears to be no judicial authority as to the effect (if any) of
this change: certainly I was referred to none. The question is canvassed by some of the
commentators, though unhappily for Mr Long and the council, who as a result have
been driven to litigate the matter, the commentators do not speak with one voice.
72. Foa, The General Law of Landlord and Tenant, 7th ed 1947, at p10, puts the point very
clearly:
A parol lease might be made under the exception in the Statute of Frauds to take effect in futuro,
provided that it came to an end within three years from the making thereof
(Ryley v Hicks (1725) 1 Stra 651). The present statute seems to except only those taking effect
immediately in possession.
73. The same view is expressed in Megarry and Wade at p637, where it is said that:
A lease taking effect in possession is to be contrasted with one taking effect in reversion, eg a
lease granted today to take effect in 19 days' time …
74. Emmet on Title, 19th ed 1986, vol 2, para 26.006 expresses the same view as Megarry
and Wade in very similar language. Hill and Redman's Law of Landlord and Tenant,
18th ed 1988, vol 1, at ppA264--265, paras A[631][639], is to the same effect, drawing
a distinction between
(a) reversionary leases, that is leases to take effect in reversion at the time of the grant,
possession being postponed to a future date (which are outside the s 54(2) exception); and (b)
leases which take effect in possession at once but where the term is calculated from a future
date (which are within the exception).
75. These plainly support Mr Walter's argument. Miss Hargreaves referred me to the
contrary view expressed in Halsbury's Laws of England, 4th ed 1994 reissue, vol 27(1),
at p87, para 78, where it says of section 54(2):
The three years are computed from the day of the making of the lease; and, if the term does not
commence at once, it must expire, or be capable of expiring, within three years from that day.

Long v Tower Hamlets London Borough Council [1996] EWHC Ch 1 (20
March 1996).docx
17

[Rawlins v Turner (1699) 1 Ld Raym 736; Foster v Reeves [1892] 2 QB 255, per Lord Esher
MR.] The exception to the requirement of a deed is not confined to leases commencing at the
time they are made. [Ryley v Hicks (1725) 1 Stranage 651]
76. One's confidence in that view might be somewhat greater were it not for the fact that
the passage has remained unchanged since before 1925: compare Halsbury's Laws, 1st
ed 1911, vol 18, at p384, para 830. Miss Hargreaves also referred me to Woodfall's Law
of Landlord and Tenant, looseleaf ed 1994, vol 1, at p5/2, para 5.003,
where Ryley v Hicks (1725) 1 Stranage 651 is still referred to as good authority, albeit
not for the point at present in issue. Again, the passage in question has remained
virtually unchanged since before 1925: compare Woodfall's Law of Landlord and
Tenant, 21st ed 1924, at p158. Moreover, elsewhere in the current edition the view
appears to be expressed that a lease takes effect in possession for the purposes of section
54(2) only if it is to commence immediately and not at a future date: Woodfall, vol 1,
at p6/8, para 6.019.
77. The preponderance of the commentaries therefore supports Mr Walter. That fact though
suggestive can hardly be decisive. There are, however, in my judgment, three reasons
why Mr Walter's argument is indeed correct.
78. In the first place, the words 'in possession', when used as part of the phrase 'taking effect
in possession for a term not exceeding three years', in my judgment, have their normal
legal meaning. They connote an estate or interest in the land which is vested 'in
possession' rather than merely vested 'in interest'. This reading is powerfully reinforced
by the distinction drawn in section 205(1)(xxvii) of the Law of Property Act 1925
between a 'term of years taking effect in possession' and a 'term of years taking effect
in reversion'. The words 'taking effect in possession' in section 54(2) are, in my
judgment, used in the same sense in which those words are used in section 205(1)(xxvii)
and thus, and this is the critical point, in distinction to the words 'taking effect in
reversion'. This, as it seems to me, demonstrates that, as Mr Walter submits,
reversionary leases were not intended to come within the ambit of section 54(2). Putting
the same point rather differently, the words 'taking effect in possession' are used in
section 54(2) in such a way as to achieve the same result as that contended for by
Dampier J in Inman v Stamp when he sought to argue that the exception in section 2 of
the Statute of Frauds applied only to leases 'executed by possession'.
79. Second, it is very difficult, if Miss Hargreaves' argument is correct, to see what was the
purpose of including the words 'in possession' in section 54(2) at all. It is implicit in her
argument that the words 'taking effect in possession' in section 54(2) are descriptive of
the quality of the lease at the date when the term commences and not of the quality of
the lease at the date of the parol grant. Given the definition of 'possession' in section
205(1)(xix) of the Law of Property Act 1925, however, it would seem that any lease,
even a concurrent lease, must necessarily take effect 'in possession' at the date when the
term commences. So, if Miss Hargreaves is correct, the words 'in possession' add
nothing to what would otherwise be the effect of section 54(2).
80. The third reason is, in my judgment, decisive. It will be remembered that those leases
which fell within the exception in section 2 of the Statute of Frauds were defined, so
far as is material for present purposes, as being
Leases not exceeding the Term of Three Years from the making thereof.

Long v Tower Hamlets London Borough Council [1996] EWHC Ch 1 (20
March 1996).docx
18

81. In contrast, those leases which fall within the exception in section 54(2) are defined, so
far as is material for present purposes, as being
leases taking effect in possession for a term not exceeding three years.
82. It will be seen that the three-year period referred to in section 2 of the Statute of Frauds
is not the same as the three-year period referred to in section 54(2). Under the Statute
of Frauds the three-year period was the period 'from the making' of the lease, in other
words the period of three-years from the date of the parol grant. Thus, whether or not
the language of section 2 implicitly required the term of the lease to commence on 'the
making thereof' (the point on which Dampier J in Inman v Stamp thought
that Ryley v Hicks (1725) 1 Stranage 651 had been wrongly decided), the words 'not
exceeding the Term of Three Years from the making thereof' plainly meant that, as held
by Holt CJ in Rawlins v Turner (1699) 1 Ld Raym 736, no lease by parol could be good
which imported to convey an interest for more than three-years from the time of the
making. Under section 4(2), on the other hand, the three-year period is the period of the
term comprised in the lease. Moreover, there has been omitted from section 4(2) any
express reference to the date of 'the making' of the lease. Thus, if Miss Hargreaves'
argument is correct, there is no limit expressed in section 54(2) to the period which may
elapse before the lease 'tak[es] effect in possession', the only requirement being that the
lease, when eventually it does 'tak[e] effect in possession', must be 'for a term not
exceeding three years'. On this footing the only limit to the period which might elapse
before the term 'tak[es] effect in possession' would be the period of 21 years specified
in section 149(3) of the Law of Property Act 1925.
83. Miss Hargreaves, of course, recoils from going this far. Her argument acknowledges
that the term, whether it is to commence immediately or at some date in the future, must
not extend beyond three years from the date of the parol grant. However it is impossible
to find that limitation in the language of section 54(2) unless it is to be found, as I think
it is to be found, in the crucial words 'taking effect in possession', those words then
being understood, as they have to be understood, in the sense which I have already
indicated. Indeed, Miss Hargreaves comes very close to recognising how far the logic
of her argument drives her when she suggests that the restrictions on the grant of
reversionary leases are to be found in section 149 of the Law of Property Act 1925, and
not in section 54(2). But this, in my judgment, is quite impossible. There is simply no
basis for suggesting that what parliament envisaged when it repealed section 2 of the
Statute of Frauds and enacted section 54(2) was the grant of parol leases which might
not come into effect for 21 years and might not come to an end for 24 years. It makes
sense to suggest, as is implicit in Mr Walter's argument, that parliament intended to
clarify the law and, by adopting Dampier J's approach, to abolish the gloss
to Rawlins v Turner (1699) 1 Ld Raym 736 represented by the somewhat controversial
decision in Ryley v Hicks (1725) 1 Stranage 651. It is a very different thing indeed to
suggest that parliament intended to sweep away the basic principle articulated
in Rawlins v Turner and to widen so drastically the class of leases excepted from the
operation of what are now sections 52(1) and 54(1) of the Law of Property Act 1925.
84. One final comment on the matter is perhaps appropriate. As Mr Walter points out, the
effect of construing section 54(2) in the way for which he contends is to put an end to
the distinction, based on sections 2 and 4 of the Statute of Frauds and illustrated by
cases such as Edge v Strafford (1831) 1 Cr & J 391, of an oral letting in futuro being

Long v Tower Hamlets London Borough Council [1996] EWHC Ch 1 (20
March 1996).docx
19

enforceable qua lease, but not qua contract. If his construction of section 54(2) is
correct, the effect of the Law of Property Act 1925 was to make equally unenforceable
both an oral executory agreement to grant a lease (section 40) and an oral attempt to
grant a lease taking effect in possession in the future (section 54(2)), and, accordingly,
to put an end to the need to distinguish between those oral transactions for a future
tenancy which, as a matter of construction, took effect as mere agreements, and were
thus unenforceable by virtue of section 4 of the Statute of Frauds, and those oral
transactions which, as a matter of construction, took effect as leases, and thus fell within
the exception in section 2 of the Statute of Frauds. It is tempting to think that this was,
indeed, parliament's intention when it replaced section 2 of the Statute of Frauds with
section 54(2) of the Law of Property Act 1925, but the temptation, which rests on mere
speculation, must in my judgment be resisted. Be that as it may, it is of some comfort
to note that, accepting Mr Walter's submission, as I do, this is indeed the effect of the
legislation.
85. Accordingly Mr Walter is correct, in my judgment, when he submits that reversionary
leases conferring no immediate right to take possession are altogether excluded from
the ambit of section 54(2) of the Law of Property Act 1925 and that such reversionary
leases can take effect only if made by deed. It follows that the tenancy document (which
it is common ground was a reversionary lease not made by deed and not conferring on
Mr Long an immediate right to take possession) was incapable of taking effect as a
parol lease under section 54(2). Thus, as Mr Walter submits, the tenancy which
undoubtedly came into existence was not one created by the tenancy document but
rather one which arose by operation of law. From this it follows, in my judgment, that
the tenancy document is not a 'lease in writing' within the meaning of para 5(1) of
Schedule 1 to the Limitation Act 1980. Accordingly, and as a matter of law, Miss
Hargreaves fails in her first argument for striking out Mr Long's claim.
Issue 2 - the Landlord and Tenant Act 1954
86. Miss Hargreaves' second argument is based on the provisions of the Landlord and
Tenant Act 1954. She submits that Mr Long's tenancy was a tenancy to which Part II
of the Landlord and Tenant Act 1954 applied. Section 24(1) of that Act provides that:
A tenancy to which this Part of this Act applies shall not come to an end unless terminated in
accordance with the provisions of this Part of this Act;
an event which, she says, did not occur in the present case until the notice to quit given to Mr
Long in or about September 1983 expired on March 25 1984. She points out that section 24(2)
of the Landlord and Tenant Act 1954 does not include the operation of the Limitation Act 1980
among the list of matters which, notwithstanding section 24(1), are expressed not to prevent a
tenancy to which the Act applies coming to an end. In short, she submits, the effect of the clear
and mandatory language of section 24(1) is to make it impossible for the tenant under a tenancy
to which Part II of the Act applies to be in adverse possession within the meaning of para 8(1)
of Schedule 1 to the Limitation Act 1980 until such time as the tenancy has been terminated in
accordance with the provisions of Part II of the Act. The argument is entirely novel: neither
Miss Hargreaves nor Mr Walter was able to point me to any authority in which the point has
been canvassed let alone decided.
87. A
similar
argument
in
the
context
of
the
Rent
Acts
was
rejected
in Moses v Lovegrove [1952] 2 QB 533. I have to confess that my initial reaction to

Long v Tower Hamlets London Borough Council [1996] EWHC Ch 1 (20
March 1996).docx
20

Miss Hargreaves' argument reflected that of Sir Raymond Evershed MR when he said
at p537:
Such a view, if well founded is, I think, somewhat startling, for it would necessarily follow
therefrom that in a case of premises controlled or covered by the Rent Restriction legislation,
unless the statutory period under the Limitation Act, 1939, had expired before they came under
the control, no Limitation Act could ever run in favour of the tenant, or could ever run at all,
so long as the Rent Restriction legislation remains on the statute book.
There is a further reason for thinking such a conclusion surprising, and it was a reason noticed
by my brother Romer during the argument: the Rent Restriction legislation is intended to
protect tenants. If … [counsel] is right, it would, in this instance, have the peculiar and oblique
effect of preserving to the landlord a right in respect of this property, which she would
indubitably, on the argument, otherwise have lost.
88. Miss Hargreaves points out, however, that there is a fundamental difference between
the operation of the Rent Acts and the operation of Part II of the Landlord and Tenant
Act 1954. Whereas the Rent Acts do not prevent the termination of the tenancy by a
common law notice to quit, and thus confer on the protected tenant no more than what
has been described as a 'personal status or statutory right of irremovability', Part II of
the Landlord and Tenant Act 1954 continues the common law tenancy, albeit with a
statutory variation as to the mode of determination. What Miss Hargreaves says as to
the distinction between the two statutory schemes of protection is, of course, entirely
correct. For my part, however, I doubt that the distinction which Miss Hargreaves draws
really bears upon the reasoning which underlay the decision of the Court of Appeal
in Moses v Lovegrove [1952] 2 QB 533 or that it is sufficient, for the purposes of the
proper application of the Limitation Act 1980, to justify distinguishing the two types of
case in the way she suggests.
89. Be that as it may (and I wish to emphasise that I am expressing no final view on Miss
Hargreaves' submissions), there is, in my judgment, a fundamental flaw in her argument
which makes it impossible for her to succeed at this stage in the litigation. This is that
her argument assumes that Mr Long's tenancy was a tenancy to which Part II of the
Landlord and Tenant Act 1954 applied at the material times. However, Part II of the
Act applies only to tenancies where the property comprised in the tenancy is or includes
premises occupied by the tenant for the purposes of a business carried on by him or for
those and other purposes: section 23(1). Given the factual disputes between the parties
to which I have already referred, and the general paucity of the evidence at present
before the court, it would not, in my judgment, be appropriate to assume for the
purposes of this striking out application, as on Miss Hargreaves' case to have to, that
Mr Long was at the material times occupying the whole or some part of the premises
for the purposes of a business being carried on by him.
90. Accordingly I reject Miss Hargreaves' second argument for striking out Mr Long's
claim.
Issue 3 - acknowledgement
91. Miss Hargreaves' final argument is that Mr Long acknowledged the GLC's title to the
premises in 1984, that is less than 12 years before the present proceedings were
commenced. In this connection she relies upon sections 29 to 31 of the Limitation Act

Long v Tower Hamlets London Borough Council [1996] EWHC Ch 1 (20
March 1996).docx
21

1980. She accepts that the acknowledgement must be in writing. She puts her case in
two ways.
92. First, she relies upon a letter dated January 12 1984 written to the GLC by Jones, Son
& Day, a firm of estate agents and valuers who Mr Walter accepts were acting as Mr
Long's agents. The letter was in the following terms:
Long Brothers
Clemence Street Site
11/19 & 21 Turners Road
We refer to your letter of 14th September with enclosure. Since it would appear our clients are
entitled to compensation for disturbance we shall be obliged if appropriate claim form be
forwarded.
As our clients would prefer alternative accommodation they ask if your Council have any lock-
up type store in the area to let of 500/600 square feet.
93. Neither the letter of September 14 1983 nor its enclosure was in evidence before me.
Both seem to have been lost.
94. Deputy Master Wall thought that the reference to compensation might have been to
statutory compensation following the service of a compulsory purchase order. Miss
Hargreaves was able to demonstrate to my satisfaction that this cannot have been the
case, and Mr Walter does not seek to argue the contrary. Miss Hargreaves and Mr
Walter are at one in accepting that the enclosure to the missing letter of September 14
1983 was in all probability a notice to quit served in accordance with Part II of the
Landlord and Tenant Act 1954, and in accepting that the reference to compensation in
the letter of January 12 1984 was in all probability a reference to compensation payable
under that Act. Mr Walter, however, draws attention to the fact that, while the letter of
January 12 1984 referred to two other properties in addition to the premises, namely 11
and 19 Turners Road, it referred to the letter of September 14 1983 as having apparently
contained only a single enclosure. Therefore, he says, it is not shown with that degree
of probability necessary to justify the striking out of Mr Long's claim, either that the
letter of September 14 1983 contained a notice to quit the premises, as opposed to a
notice to quit one or other or both of the other properties, or that the letter of January
12 1984 was written with reference to the premises.
95. Furthermore, says Mr Walter, the letter of January 12 1984 did not constitute an
acknowledgment of the GLC's title to anything because it was not making any definite
assertion. The critical words 'it would appear' are, he says, suggestive of no more than
an inference derived from a document just received rather than an assertion or
admission of fact. The letter of January 12 1984 merely assumes for the sake of
argument that something said in the missing letter of September 14 1983 may be
correct, but without acknowledging that it necessarily is. It amounts, he says, to nothing
more than a comment to the effect that 'on the basis of what you say in your letter, and
assuming for the sake of argument that it is correct, it would appear … '. The request
for a claim form cannot, he says, be read as an admission of anything. He points out
that it is difficult to construe the letter of January 12 1984 without knowing what had

Long v Tower Hamlets London Borough Council [1996] EWHC Ch 1 (20
March 1996).docx
22

been said in the letter of September 14 1983 and without knowing the precise form of
its enclosure. He relies upon the subjunctive use of the word 'would' which, he says, is
not consistent with an unequivocal acknowledgment.
96. I can see the force of Mr Walter's arguments. The point, in a sense, is a short one, but
at the end of the day, and not having seen either the letter of September 14 1983 or its
enclosure, I am not prepared to hold that the letter of January 12 1984 constituted an
acknowledgment by Mr Long of GLC's title to the premises.
97. In the alternative, Miss Hargreaves relies upon the following letter written to the GLC
by Mr Long on March 1 1984:
As explained to your dept on many times we are exempt from water rates, we have no toilets
no running water at all. One of your men came round and had a look at the premises later part
of last year to see for himself what I said was correct.
98. Miss Hargreaves says, on the evidence I have seen no doubt correctly, that the GLC's
practice was to collect water rates on behalf of Thames Water only in respect
of tenanted properties. Therefore, she says, the very fact that in 1984 the GLC were, as
the evidence shows, trying to collect water rates from Mr Long indicates that he must
still have been paying rent to GLC for the shop. That may or may not be so, but as I
have already said the date when Mr Long last paid rent is a matter which can only be
resolved at trial. More to the point, however, Miss Hargreaves submits that there would
have been no purpose in Mr Long approaching GLC with the complaint about the water
supply set out in his letter of March 1 1984 unless he had thought that GLC was
responsible for the water supply by reason of his tenancy. Therefore, she says, the letter
of March 1 1984 constitutes an acknowledgment by Mr Long of the GLC's title to the
premises.
99. Mr Walter says that the letter of March 1 1984 cannot possibly be construed as an
acknowledgment of GLC's title as freeholder. The only admission, he says, is that the
GLC were demanding payment of the water rate. I agree. It is, in my judgment, nothing
to the point that the GLC's practice was to collect water rates only from tenanted
properties and that the GLC may therefore have thought that Mr Long was their tenant.
There is nothing in the evidence I have seen to show that Mr Long either knew of the
GLC's practice or had any reason to believe that the reason why the GLC were
demanding payment of the water rates was because they were treating him as their
tenant. There is, in my judgment, no warrant for Miss Hargreaves' assertion that Mr
Long must have thought that the GLC were responsible for the water supply by reason
of his tenancy. Absent knowledge of the GLC's practice, there is any number of reasons
why someone in Mr Long's position may have thought that the GLC, a local authority
exercising many public functions, was responsible for collecting water rates.
Acknowledgment by Mr Long that the GLC had some form of responsibility for the
water supply to the premises cannot of itself and without more ado, in my judgment,
constitute an acknowledgment by him of the GLC's title to the land. Someone like Mr
Long is as likely to have thought that the GLC were exercising their functions as local
authority as to have thought that their involvement was as owner of the land.
Conclusion

Long v Tower Hamlets London Borough Council [1996] EWHC Ch 1 (20
March 1996).docx
23

100.
Accordingly, in my judgment, Miss Hargreaves has failed to make out any of
the grounds she relies upon to justify striking out Mr Long's claim. It may be that, at
trial, she will succeed in making good one or other of the matters on which I have held
there to be triable issues. But she has failed to show, as she must if it is to be struck out
at this stage, that Mr Long's claim is doomed to fail. Mr Long is entitled to go to trial
to have his claim determined.
101.
It follows, in my judgment, that Mr Long's appeal must be allowed. I shall
therefore set aside the order made by Deputy Master Wall on September 26 1995 and
dismiss the summons issued by the council on March 21 1995.
Appeal allowed.
