BAR LIBRARY ! ^ / «
"a^^s^^
ROYAL COimTS OF )WJ\C7
f
^^^/yrrf
/v ^ ^ ^
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF JUDICATURE
1975 H. No.223
COURT 0? APPEAL
<c7)
TV ^r< Qr-r~n2^^
^ _ ^
ON APPEAL FROM THE HIGH COURT OF JUSTICE
- - r ^
(/
QUEEN'S BENCH DIVISION
Ahrr& /rTTpUifS^
^£^Jx%3££&r*'ry''
^ ^
a
/fry? 0-f r r r ^ T ^^&TOI ^ r ^ - e ^
(MR. JUSTICE SWANWICK)
/&^j2<ft-GW~--^P
i^-y^^i<^nrT<'X
Y
^?~C*.
W&HY^
>f*VZ? / ^ C ^ ^ » T H W e t o e B d a y y i e t h May,1977.
-TT^T^-r
//* mo^t-*^
Before:
&*&-**-(/•?-*
i*7?&* ^
tf=?C3-^
r > w r
**'g/er THf^TFR^OF 'THE R Q L L S / / ^ ^ ^ ^ ^
* /4^r^Arrz7
(Lord Denning)
(
(/-^ent <p) j
^ ^ T
crT
LORD JUSTICE ORR and •£*?/>? er?>r2£-4-*
/*~r-v^
/rev7*-/ ^ ^
H. PARSONS (LIVESTOCK) LIMITED
Plaintiffs
(Respondents)
v.
UTTLEY INGHAM AND COMPANY LTD.
Defendants
(Appellants)
*r ^rr-r-^^t
c^^j^r^C fK-t^o*^
^Tvr^^t^ ^np
Srm&
. c Q - y t ^ ' /*o*^<£-#-^- ^ - ^ ^ c > . £ r ^
C ^ P r. o^r^ A **>V4 -r- /r^'V

© Crown Copyright 1982
THE ASSOCIATION OF OFFICIAL
SHORTHANDWRITERS, LTD.
Room 392
2 NEW SQUARE
ROYAL COURTS OF JUSTICE
LINCOLN'S INN
W.C.2
Telephone: 01-405 9884

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF JUDICATURE
A COURT OP APPEAL
ON APPEAL FROM THE HIGH COURT OE JUSTICE
QUEEN'S BENCH DIVISION
(MR. JUSTICE SWANWICK)
B
Before:
THE MASTER OE THE ROLLS
(Lord Denning)
LORD JUSTICE ORR and
LORD JUSTICE SCARMAN
1975 H. No.223
Royal Courts of Justice.
Wednesday,18th May.1977.
D
H. PARSONS (LIVESTOCK) LIMITED
Plaintiffs
(Res pond c'lvFs)
v,
UTTLEY INGHAM AND COMPANY LTD.
Defendants
(Appellants)
(Transcript of the Shorthand Notes of the Association of Official
Shorthand-writers Ltd., Room 392, Royal Courts of Justice, and
2 New Square, Lincoln's Inn, London, V/.C.2).
THE HON. C. BATHURST (instructed by Messrs. Herbert, Oppenheimer,
Nathan & Vandyk, Solicitors. London) appeared on behalf of
the Plaintiffs (Respondents).
G MR. M. DRAKE, Q.C.. MR. D. HOGG and MR. N. DAVIDSON (instructed by
Messrs. Elborne, Mitchell & Co., Solicitors, London) appeared
c^ behalf of the Defendants (Appellants).
H
J U D G M E N T
1.

THE MASTER OF TH7, ROLLS: We are most grateful to Mr, Justice Swanwick
A
for the admirable way in which he has summarised the evidence and
given his judgment. It has saved the parties the expense of a
transcript of the evidence and has greatly shortened the time of
the appeal.
B
Parsons (Livestock) Ltd. have a fine herd of nearly 700 pigs
at their farm in Derbyshire. They call it the Wayside Herd.
They manage it most efficiently. They feed the pigs on special
r
pig-nuts. They use about 10 tons a month of these pig-nuts. In
order to store and handle these pig-nuts, Parsons bought in 1968
it
a big hopper called a bulk-feed storage-hopper. They bought/from
the makers, Uttloy Ingham & Co. Ltd., who are sheet-metal workers.
j)
Parsons paid £270 for it. It was a huge round metal bin 28 feet
high and 8 feet 6 inches in diameter. It was cylindrical at the
top and tapering down into a cone. It had a lid on the top with
a ventilator in it. The pig-nuts go into the top and come out
E
at the bottom.
The first hopper was so successful that in 1971 Parsons
ordered a second one to be just the same as the first, It cost
£275. The makers accepted the order in a letter of 23rd April,
F
1971 in these terms: "... We are very pleased to book your order
for one Bulk Hopper exactly as supplied in 1968 .., Hopper fitted
with ventilated top and complete with filler and breather pipes?
...Ex Works Price £275.00. Carriage charges £15.00. We deliver
**
in an upright position on your prepared concrete base and bolt
down ... tipping the Hopper off the back of the vehicle".
On 2nd-August, !.971, the makers delivered the hopper to the
site. It was exactly the same as the first, but when the delivery
man erected it in position he forgot to adjust the ventilator.
2.

He left it closed. It was fastened with a piece of tape which
had "been put on so as to stop it rattling on the journey. No one
noticed the mistake, because the ventilator was at the top of
the hopper 28 feet above the ground. The delivery man went off.
The pig farmers used the hopper. They put pig-nuts into it just
B
as they did with the first hopper. On 12th August, 1971 thoy
filled it with 94" tons of pig-nuts. On 10th September, 8-^ tons.
On 1st October 8 tons.
At first all was well. But on 28th September a small number
C
of the nuts appeared to bo mouldy. The farmers did not think
this would harm the pigs. So they went on feeding them. Parly
in October more nuts turned mouldy. But still the farmers were
not unduly concerned. As a rule, mouldy nuts do not harm pigs.
On Saturday, 9th October, there was a bigger proportion of mouldy
nuts: and some of the pigs wore showing signs of illness. About
sows
six of the twcnty-onc/suckling litters wore very loose: and about
seven or eight were not eating all their ration of nuts. Over
JL
the weekend the pig farmers became really concerned. They did
not know the cause. They telephoned the suppliers of the nuts.
They telephoned the veterinary surgeon. The suppliers of nuts
P
came. The veterinary surgeon came. Thoy stopped feeding the
pigs with nuts from the hopper. They got some bagged food and
fed them from the bags. They telephoned the makers. On Friday,
15th October, a representative of the makers came. He climbed
Q
up to the top of the hopper. He found the ventilator closed.
Ho opened it. When he came down, he said to the pig farmers:
"That appears to be your trouble".
It was indeed the trouble. After much evidence by experts,
H
the Judge found that the closed ventilator was the cause. But
the effects remained so as to affect the herd greatly. A large
5.

number of the pigs suffered an attack of E. coli, which is very
A
bad for pigs. It was "triggered"off by the eating of the mouldy
nuts. The infection spread rapidly. 254 pigs died of a value
of £10,000, They also lost sales and turnover resulting in big
financial loss. The total claim is £20,000 or £30,000. The
question is whether that damage is recoverable from the makers,
or whether it is too remote.
TEH JUDGE'S 7IM)XNGS
The Judge had before him the speeches in the House of Lords
C
in Czarnikow v. Koufos (1969) 2 Appeal Cases 350 about remoteness
of damage. That case draws a distinction between contract and
tort. Remoteness in contract depends in what the parties
"reasonably contemplated at the time of the contract": whereas
D
in tort it depends on what could "reasonably be foreseen at the
time of the breach". But the Judge did not think either of those
tests was applicable. He based his decision on the implied term
that the goods should be reasonably fit for the purpose under the
E
implied condition of Section 14(1) of the Sale of Goods Act 1893
as it then was. He held that this was an "absolute warranty"
and that, in case of a breach, the seller was liable for all the
damage of which the breach was a cause. The Judge said
F
significantly that "The plaintiffs do not have to prove that the
toxicity or its results were foreseeable to either party ... there
is no need to have recourse to the question of the presumed
Q
contemplation".
But in case he was wrong on this point, and that, being a
breach of contract, he ought to consider what was "reasonably
contemplated at the time of the contract", the Judge went on to
H
consider the facts in regard to it. He inquired whether the
"damage that occurred through the oiubreak of K. Coli was within
4.

the reasonable contemplation of the parties". After considering
A
the evidence, he said: "... Although I sympathise with the
Plaintiffs, who have no doubt suffered heavy loss as a result in
fact' on my findings of a breach of contract, I would not consider
that I would be justified in finding that in the Spring of 1971
B
at the time of the contract either a farmer in the position of
the Plaintiffs or a hopper manufacturer in the position of the
Defendants would reasonably have contemplated that there was
either a very substantial degree of possibility or a real danger
^
or serious possibility that the feeding of mouldy pig-nuts in the
condition described by Mr. Parsons would cause illness in the pigs
that ate them, even on an intensive farm such as that of the
Plaintiffs".
Applying the speeches in Czaraikow v. Koufos, that finding
would mean that the illness and death-of the pigs was too remote
to be an admissible head of damage.
TIF) T^RMS OF CONTRACT
The Judge derived his "absolute warranty" from Section 14(1)
of the Sale of Goods Act, 189? about reasonable fitness for the
purpose. I agree that the warranty in Section 14(1) is absolute
in this sense: that if the goods are unfit owing to a latent
F
defect, which could not be discovered by any amount of care,
nevertheless the seller is liable. But I do not think this
absoluteness means that the seller is liable for all consequences
of a breach, however remote the consequences may be. He is only
liable, as Section 53(2) says, for "the estimated loss directly
and naturally resulting, in the ordinary course of events, from
the breach of warranty". That Section is an attempted codification
j
of the rule in Hadley v. Baxendale and should be so interpreted.
But I am not sure that Section 14(l) was really appropriate
5.

here. The contract was divisible into two parts: (i) The sale
\
of the hopper; (ii) The erection of it. Under the seo&.nd part,
the maker was under a duty to use reasonable care in erecting
the hopper. But even so, here again the maker would not be
liable for all consequences. He would only be liable for such
B
damage "as may fairly and reasonably be considered as arising
naturally, i.e., according to the usual course of things, from
the breach" - see Hadloy v. Baxendalo (1854) 9 Exchequer 341.
That is virtually the same as Section 53(2).
C
On either view, therefore, the maker is not liable for all
the consequences: but only for such damage as is not too remote
in law. So I turn to examine the Judge's findings of fact in
regard to it.
D
THT. JUDGE'S FINDINGS OF FACT
As I read the Judge's findings of fact, he was of opinion
that the makers of the hopper could reasonably contemplate these
consequences: (i) that the ventilator would remain closed
E
whilst the hopper was in use; (ii) that the pig-nuts stored in
it would become mouldy for want of proper ventilation; (iii)
that the pig-nuts would bo fed to the pigs in a mouldy condition;
(iv) that the makers would not reasonably contemplate that there
•p
was a serious possibility that the mouldy nuts would cause the
pigs to become ill. There may have been a slight possibility,
but not a serious possibility. It was so slight that the pig
farmers (who fed the nuts to the pigs knowing that they were
mouldy) did not themselves feel any concern about feeding the
mouldy nuts to the pigs.
By making those findings, the Judge has presented us with
a nice .problem of remoteness of damage. Mr. Drake, Q.C.
H
submitted that the last finding (iv) means that the pig farmers
6.

should fail. The action is in breach of contract. It has, he
^
says, been held by the House of Iiords that a contract-breaker is
only liable for the consequences which he may reasonably contempla
as a serious possibility, and not for those which he can only
foresee as a slight possibility.
B
THE LAW AS TO KEMOTFNESS
Remoteness of damage is beyond doubt a question of law. It
runs on parallel lines in both contract and tort until it nears
the end of the journey. Then the lines diverge. I will first
C
draw the parallel lines. The Court does not, as a rule, look
into the mind of the real contract-breaker or the real tortfeasor.
It does not inquire into what the real person himself contemplated
or foresaw. The Court takes an imaginary man and supposes that
D
he is a reasonable man. It puts him in the place of. the real man.
It then supposes that that imaginary man or his servants made
the contract and broke it: or that he or his servants did the aot
or omission that amounted to a tort. The Court assumes that this
k
imaginary man, at the time of making the contract, had in mind
the actual breach which afterwards took place (see 1969 2 Lloyds
at page 465)J or,at the time of committing the tort, had in mind
the kind of tort that he or his servants were committing.
F
Whereas, of course, in real life, in 99 cases out of 100, the
real man would not envisage any such thing or be aware of it in
the least. Then, having clothed the imaginary man with all that
imaginary knowledge, the Court considers the actual breach of
G
contract or the actual tort that took place: and also the actual
consequences which followed after it - post hoc. The Court then
carries out an exercise in causation. It segregates the
consequences of which the offending act or omission was the
cause or one of the causes - propter hoc; and discards the
7.

consequences of which it was not a cause.
.
That exercise in causation is said to depend simply on
A
commonsense: but it may be most uncommonly difficult to decide,
particularly when the acts of third parties intervene as in
Weld-Blundell v. Stephens (192C)> Appeal Cases 956 and the Dorset
B
Yacht case (1970) Appeal Gases 1004, in which case the likelihood
of the consequence is very relevant. But in the present case
the exercise in causation is easily solved. The closed ventilator
was clearly the cause, or one of the causes, of the death of the
£
pigs. There was an unbroken sequence all the way. The problem
in this case is with remoteness of damage.
Now I leave the parallel lines and turn to the point where
they diverge. It is at the point of which the House of Lords
D
spoke in Czarnfeow v. Koufos (l969)lAppeal Cases 3r'0, They* say
that, in remoteness of damage, there is a difference between
contract and tort. In the case of a breach of contract, the
Court has to consider whether the consequences were of such a kind
E
that a reasonable man, at the time of making the contract, would
contemplate them as being of a very substantial degree of
probability. Wot merely "on the cards" because that may be too
low: but as being "not unlikely to occur" (383A, 388F): or "likely
F
to result or at least not unlikely to result" (406F): or "liable
to result" (410G): or that there was a "real danger" or "serious
possibility" of them occurring (415D). In the case of a tort,
thp Court has to consider x^hether the consequences were of such
a kind that a reasonable man, at the time of the tort committed,
would foresee them as being of a much lower degree of probability.
It is sufficient if the consequences are "liable to happen in
the most unusual case" (385G) or in a "very improbable" case (389G)>
H
or that "they may happen as a result of the breach, however
8.

unlikely it may "be, unless it can "be brushed aside as far-fetched"
(422 C-D).
A
There is no doubt a difference between the two tests, but I
find them difficult to apply universally to all cases of contract
or to all cases of tort; and to draw a distinction between what
_
a man "contemplates" and what he "foresees". In the daily round
I soon begin to get out of my depth. I cannot swim in this sea
of semantic exercises - to say nothing of the different degrees
of probability - especially when the cause of action can be laid
£
either in contract or in tort, I am swept under by the
conflicting currents. I go back with relief to the distinction
drawn in legal theory by Professors Hart and Honore in their
book on "Causation in the Law" at pages 281 to 287. They
j)
distinguish between those cases in contract in which a man has
suffered no damage to person or property, but only economic loss,
such as? loss of profit or loss of opportunities for gain in some
future transaction: and those in which he claims damages for an
E
injury actually done to his person or damage actually done to
his property (including his lifostock) or for ensuing expense
(damnum emergens) to which he has actually been put. That is a
distinction which has been under discussion much lately in the
F
law of tort, see Spartan Steel & Alloys v. Martin & Co. (Contractors]
(1973) 1 Queen's Bench 27 at pages 36/37, and underline the words
of Lord Wilberforce in Anns v. London Borough of Merton recently,
where-he classified the recoverable damages as "material, physical
G
damages". If this distinction were to be introduced into the law
of contract, it might enable us to keep afloat in these troubled
waters. I would suggest this as a solution:
In the former class of case - loss of profit cases - the
™
defaulting party is only liable for the consequences if they are
10.

such as, at the time of the contract, he ought reasonably to have
contemplated as a serious possibility or real danger. You must
A
assume that, at the time of the contract, he had-fa e very kind of
breach in mind - such a broach as afterwards happened, as for
instance, delay in transit - and then you must ask: Ought Bie
reasonably to have contemplated that there was a serious
T»
possibility that such a breach would involve the plaintiff- in
loss of profit? If Yes, the contractor is liable for the loss
unless he has taken care to exempt himself from it by a condition
in the contract - as, of course, he is able to do if it was the
C
sort of thing which he could reasonably contemplate. The law
on this class of case is now covered by the three leading cases
of Hadley v. Baxendale (1854) 9 Exchequer 341; the Victoria
Laundry case (1949) 2 King's Bench 528; Czarnikow v. Koufos (1969)
D
1 Appeal Cases 350. These were all "loss of profit" cases: and
the test of "reasonable contemplation" should, I suggest, be kept
to that type of loss or, at any rate, to economic loss.
In the second class of case - the physical injury or expense
E
case - the defaulting party is liable for any damage which he
ought reasonably to have foreseen at the time of the breach as a
possible consequence, even If it was only a slight possibility.
You must assume that he was aware of his breach, and then you
F
must ask: Ought ho reasonably to have foreseen, at the time of
the breach, that something of this kind might happen in consequence
of it? This is the test which has been applied in cases of tort,
G
ever since The Wagon Mound case© (1961) Appeal Cases 388; (1967)
Appeal Cases 617. But there is a long line of cases which
support a like test in cases of contract. One class of case which
is particularly apposite here concerns latent defects in goods.
jl
In many of these cases the manufacturer is liable in contract to
11.

the immediate party for a breach of his duty to use reasonable
care: and is liable in tort to the ultimate consumer for the same
^
want of reasonable care. The ultimate consumer can either sue
the retailer in contract and pass the liability up the chain to
the manufacturer: or he can sue the manufacturer in tort and thus
by-pass the chain. The liability of the manufacturer ought to
bo the same in either case. In nearly all these cases the defects
were outside the range of anything that was in fact contemplated,
or could reasonably have been contemplated, or by anyone down the
chain to the retailers. Yet the manufacturer and others in the
C
chain have been held liable for the- damage done to the ultimate
user: as for instance the death of the young pheasants in the
Hardwj.ck game Farm case (1969) 2 Appeal Gases 31; and of the mink in
Hill (Christopher)v. Ashington Piggeries (1972) Appeal Cases 441.
D
Likewise the manufacturers and retailers were held liable for the
dermatitis caused by the weave in the woollen underwear case of
grant v. Australian Knitting Mills (1936) Appeal Cases 85, even
though they had not the faintest suspicion of any trouble. So
were the manufacturers down the chain to the sub-contractors for
the disintegrating roofing-tiles in Young & Marten v„ McManus
Childs (1969) 1 Appeal Cases- 454«
Another familiar class of case is where the occupier of
r
premises is under the common duty of care, both in pursuant of a
contract with a visitor or under the Occupiers Liability Act,
1957. If he fails in that duty and a visitor is injured, the test
Q
of remoteness must be the same, no matter whether the injured
person enters by virtue of a contract or as a visitor by permission
without a contract. Ho matter whether in contract or tort, the
damages must be the same. Likewise when a contractor is doing
H
work on premises for a tenant - and either the tenant or a visitor
12.

is injured - the test of remoteness is the same: no matter
.
whether the person injured is a tenant under the contract or a
A
visitor without a contract - see Billings v. Riden (1958) Appeal
Cases 240.
Yet another class of case is where a hospital authority
D
renders medical services in contract to a paying patient and
gratuitously to another patient without any contract. The paying
patient can sue in contract for negligence. The poor patient
can sue in tort - see Cassidy v. Ministry of Health (1951) 2
Q
King's Bench at pages 359/360. The test of remoteness should be
the same whether the hospital authorities are sued in contract
or in tort - see Petroleum v. Mardon (1976) 2 Weekly Law Reports
at page 595.
D
Instances could he multiplied of injuries to persons or
damage to property where the defendant is liable for his
negligence to one man in contract and to another in tort. Each
suffers like damage. The test of remoteness is, and should be,
E
the same in both.
Come now to the present case. We were told that in some cases
the makers of these hoppers supply them direct to the pig farmer
under contract with him: but in other cases they supply them
F
through an intermediate dealer - who buys from the manufacturer
and resells to the pig farmer on the self-same terms - in which
the manufacturer delivers direct to the pig farmer. In the one
case the pig farmer can sue the manufacturer in contract. In
G
the other in tort. The test of remoteness should be the same.
It should be the test in tort.
CONCLUSION
case
The present/falls within the class of case where the breach
™
of contract causes physical damage. The test of remoteness
13.

in such cases is similar to that in tort. The contractor is
A
liable for all such damage as could reasonably have been foreseen,
at the time of the breach, as a possible consequence of it.
Applied to this case, it means that the makers of the hopper are
liable for the death of the pigs. They ought reasonably to have
B
foreseen that, if the mouldy pig-nuts were fed to the pigs, there
was a possiblity that they might become ill. Not a serious
possibility. ITor a real danger. But still a possibility to be
reckoned with. On that basis the makers wore liable for the
illness suffered by the pigs. They suffered from diarrhoea at
the beginning. This "triggered off" the deadly 0. Coli". That
was a far worse illness than could then be foreseen,, But that
does not lessen this liability. The type or kind of damage was
foreseeable even though the extent of it was not - see Hughes v.
Advocate (Lord) (1963) Appeal Cases 837. The makers are liable
for the loss of the pigs that died and of the expenses of the vet,
and such like. But not for
loss of profit on future sales or
E
future opportunities of gain.
So I reach the same result as the Judge, but by a different
route. I would dismiss the appeal.
LORD JUSTICE ORR: I agree with the Master of the Rolls and also
F
'with Lord Justice Scarman,whose judgment I have had the
opportunity of reading, that this appeal should be dismissed,
but with respect to the Master of the Rolls I would dismiss it
for the reasons to be given by Lord Justice FJcarman and not on
G
the basis that a distinction is to be drawn for the present
purposes between loss of profits and personal injury cases. I
have not been satisfied that such a distinction is sufficiently
JJ
supported by the authorities.
For the present purposes the crucial passages in the judgment of
14.

B
D
Mr. Justice Swanwick are those to be quoted by Lord Justice
Scarman at pages 35/34 and page 44 of the transcript and also,
in my judgment, the passage
at page 35 where the learned judge
says: "How far must his (the defendant's) contemplation coincide
with the damage that occurs? It is in my view right that his
assumed contemplation should be limited to the type of damage •
that occurs but that he is liable if the quantum is greater than
he may be presumed to anticipate. Obviously the principle may
be difficult of appreciation in some cases, but I need not
elaborate it here because I agree with Mr. Bathurst that E. Coli
is not different in type from the digestive upset that might
it
trigger/off. It is simply the proliferation of an organism
naturally occurring in the bowel which then upsets the 'excretory
system still further and admittedly much worse".
On this basis, in my judgment correct in law, it was
sufficient to establish liability i"or the damage in question
that physical injury to the pigs was a serious possibility if in
breach of contract the hopper was unfit for storing nuts suitable
to be fed to them and I do not think it matters for this purpose
whether there was only one contract,or were two contracts, though
I agree with Lord Justice Scarman that there was only one.
F
For these reasons and in complete agreement with the judgment
to be delivered by Lord Justice Scarman, I would dismiss this
appeal and I would add my tribute to the manner in which the
case was dealt with by the trial judge.
KM
LORD JUSTICE SCARMAN: The Plaintiffs, who are pig farmers, claim
damages of more than £36,000 for breach of contract. The
Defendants admit a breach of contract but say that the Plaintiffs
JJ
are entitled to no more that £18 damages. The Judge found for
the Plaintiffs and ordered an inquiry to determine the amount
15*
E

of damages. The litigation arises out of the sale of a hopper
A
for the storage in bulk of food to be fed to the Plaintiffs' pigs.
Some of the food went mouldy and poisoned some of the pigs. The
Judge found, that the food poisoning was caused by bad storage
conditions in the hopper and resulted in the Plaintiffs suffering
substantial business loss. It was on the basis of this finding
that he gave judgment for the Plaintiffs. The issue in this Court
is one of remoteness of damage. Plainly, it is of great importance
to the parties. It also poses some difficult questions for the
C
Court, The Master of the Rolls would decide the case upon the
basis of a distinction which he suggests "Sie law recognises between
a breach of contract causing physical damage, and one which causes
loss of profit. He treats the famous trilogy of remoteness of
D
damage cases - Hadley v. Baxendale, the Victoria Laundry case,
and Czamikow v. Koufos - as limited in application to the loss
of business profits and takes the view that in cases of physical
damage the test is the same in tort as in contract. He accordingly
E
concludes that in the class of contract cases in which he puts
this case the test is in the "Wagon Mound" test - reasonable .
foreseeability.
_
My conclusion in the present case is the same as that of the
F
Master of the Rolls but I reach it by a different route. I would
dismiss the appeal. I agree with him in thinking it absurd that
the tost for remoteness of damage should, in principle, differ
Q
according to the legal classification of the cause of action -
though one must recognise that parties to a contract have the
right to 'dgree on a measure of damages which may be greater, or
less, than the law would offer in the absence of agreement. I
H
also agree with him in thinking that, notwithstanding the
interpretation put on some dicta in Czamikow v. Koufos, the law
16.

is not so absurd as to differentiate between contract and tort
A
save in situations where the agreement, or the factual relationship,
of the parties with each other requires it in the interests of
justice. I differ from him only to this extent? the cases do not,
in my judgment, support a distinction in law between loss of profit
B
and physical damage. Neither do I think it necessary to develop
the law judicially by drawing such a distinction. Of course (and
this is a reason for refusing to draw the distinction in law) the
type of consequence - loss of profit or market or physical injury
C
- will always be an important matter of fact in determining
whether in all the circumstances the loss or injury was of a type
which the parties could reasonably be supposed to have in
contemplation.
In Czarnikow v. Koufos (1969) 1 Appeal- Cases 390 (a case of
a contract of carriage of goods by sea) the House of Lords
resolved some of the difficulties in this branch of the law. The
law, which the House in that case either settled or recognised
E
as already settled, may be stated as follows: (l) the general
principle regulating damages for breach of contract is that "where
a party sustains a loss by reason of a breach of contract he is,
so far as money can do it, to be placed in the same situation •••
F
as if the contract had been performed: see Lord Pearce at page 414
quoting Baron Parke in Robinsoi v. Harman (1848) 1 Exchequer, 850
at page 855; (2) the formulation of the remoteness test is not
the same in tort and in contract because the relationship of the
G
parties in a contract situation differs from that in tort: see
Lord Reid at pages 385-36; (3) the two rules formulated by Baron
Aldorson in Hadley v. Baxendale are but two aspects of one general
principle - that to be recoverable in an action for damages for
H
breach of contract the Plaintiff's loss must be such as may
17*

reasonably be supposed would have been in the contemplation of
^
the parties as a serious possibility had their attention been
directed to the possibility of the breach which has, in fact,
occurred. Two problems are loft unsolved by Czarnikow v, Koufos:
(l) the law's reconciliation of the remoteness principle in
B
contract with that in tort where, as, for instance, in some
product liability cases, there arises the danger of differing
awards, the lesser award going to the party who has a contract,
even though the contract is silent as to the measure of damages
C
and all parties are, or must be deemed to be, burdened with the
same knowledge (or enjoying the same state of ignorance): (2)
what is meant by "serious possibility" (or its synonymns): it is
a reference to the type of consequence which the parties might
D
be supposed to contemplate as possible though unlikely, or must
the chance of it happening appear to be likely? See the way lord
Pearcc puts it at pages 416-417 of the report.
As to the first problem, I agree with the Master of the Rolls
p
in thinking that the law must be such that, in a factual situation
where all have the same actual or imputed knowledge and the contract
contains no term limiting the damages recoverable for breach, the
amount of damages recoverable does not depend upon whether, as a
F
matter of legal classification, the Plaintiff's cause of action
is breach of contract o» tort. It may be that the necessary
reconciliation is to be found, notwithstanding the strictures of
Lord Reid at pages 389-390, in holding that the difference between
"reasonably foreseeable" (the test in tort) and "reasonably
contemplated" (the test in contract) is semantic, not substantial.
Certainly Lord Justice Asquith in Victoria Laundry v. Newman
(1949) 2 King's Bench 528 at page 535 and Lord Pearce in Czarnikow
v. Koufos thought so: and I confess I think so too. The second
18.

problem - what is meant by a "serious possibility" - is, in my
A
judgment, ultimately a question of fact. I shall return to it,
therefore, after analysing the facts, since I "believe it requires
of the Judge no more - and no less - that the application of
coramonsense in the particular circumstances of the case. Finally,
B
there are two legal rules relevant to the present case, which
were not considered innCzarnikow v. Koufos.
The first relates to sale of goods. Section 53(2) of the Sale
of Goods Act 1893 provides that "the measure of damages for breach
n
of warranty is the estimated loss directly an naturally resulting-,
in the ordinary course of events, from the breach of warranty".
The subsection, clearly a statutory formulation of the first
rule in Hadley v. Baxendale, is not, however, intended to oust the
second rule, where appropriate: See Section 54» Nevertheless it
vindicates the Judge's approach to this case - always assuming
that the facts are such as to make the application of the first
rule appropriate.
Secondly, the breach does not have to be foreseen, or
contemplated. In a breach of warranty case the point may be put
in this way: it does not matter if the defect is latent. It may
be unknown, oven unknowable: see Grant v. Australian Knitting
Mills Limited (1936) Appeal Cases 85. The court has to assume,
though it be contrary to the fact, that the parties had in mind
the breach that has occurred. Thus, whenever a question of
remoteness of damage arises in a contract case, its solution
involves the Court in making a hypothesis, which may, or may not,
correspond with fact.
The Court's task, therefore, is to decide what loss to the
Plaintiffs it is reasonable to suppose would have been in the
contemplation of the parties as a serious possibility, had they
19„

had, in mind, the breach when they made their contract.
A
I now turn to the facts of the ease. The Plaintiffs are in
business as pig farmers. They own and manage an intensive pig-
farm in North Derbyshire. They are specialists in this type of
farming: and their herd of pigs is classified as a top grade one
B
under the Government's Pig Improvement Scheme. The Defendants
are sheet metal workers specialising in the manufacture of bulk
food storage hoppers and automatic feeding systems. There was
evidence that their knowledge of the risks of bad food was
C
comparable with that of food compounders^.
In 1968 the Defendants sold and delivered to the Plaintiffs
a 10-ton bulk food storage hopper. Before the contract was
concluded Mr. Geoffrey Greenwood, a sales representative of the
0
Defendants, paid a visit to the Plaintiffs* farm, saw the nature
of their operation, and had a discussion with their managing
director, Mr. Horace Parsons. Mr. Greenwood was told thsfc a large
hopper was required for the bulk storage of pignuts in a condition
fit for feeding a top grade herd of pigs bred and maintained in
an intensive farming unit. He had explained to him the size of
the herd (approximately 600 pigs and 70 sows), the method of
feeding, and the type and quantity of food required to be stored
F
in the bulk hopper.
Mr. Greenwood appreciated that the hopper must have a
ventilated top - which was, indeed, a feature emphasised in his
company's advertisements of the hoppers they offered for sale.
The contract, when made, was for a hopper "suitable for your
requirements", "complete with ventilated top" and "fitted with
filler and breather pipes". The Defendants agreed to deliver and
erect upon a previously prepared concrete base the hopper ready
for use. The hopper was duly delivered and erected. It had a
20.

ventilated top, which consisted of a movable cowl adjusted to its
fully lifted position. It proved entirely suitable for the
purpose for which it was required - a purpose plainly made known
to Mr. Greenwood before contract. As the Judge remarked, none
of the pignuts it stored was ever found to be mouldy.
B
In 1971 the Plaintiffs were minded to buy another hopper -
encouraged, no doubt, by the success of the first. Mr. Parsons
told the Defendants he wanted one exactly as supplied in 1968.
The order was accepted by the Defendants in a letter of the
C
23rd April 1971. They expressed themselves as "pleased to book
your order for 1 Bulk Hopper exactly as supplied 1968", and went
on to describe the hopper they would be delivering and installing
as "fitted with ventilated top and complete with filler and
D
breather pipes".
The hopper is a substantial piece of equipment. It stands
28 feet high. Circular in shape, it has a diameter of 8 feet 6
inches. Its base is tapered, like an inverted cone. At its very
E
top there is a ventilation hole capped by an adjustable cowl.
This top is "ventilated" only if the cowl is in its fully lifted
position. It is impossible without climbing to the top for
j-.
anyone to observe whether the top is ventilated or not,. The
filler and breather pipes are designed for the operation of
loading the food into the hopper: their contribution to
ventilation is only marginal, and may be disregarded.
Q
The Defendants, as they had/agreed to do, installed the hopper
ready for use on the concrete base prepared for it. Their delivery
man should have ensured that the top was ventilated by adjusting
the cowl to its fully lifted position. Instead, he left it in
H
the closed position. The hopper, as delivered, did not, therefore,
have a ventilated top: not was it suitable for the Plaintiffs'

requirements.
A
I agree with the Judge's findings that this was a contract
for the sale of goods by description made in circumstances: in which
the Plaintiffs had made clear to the Defendants that they relied
on the Defendants' skill and judgment to supply a hopper reasonably
B
fit for storing pignuts to be fed to the Plaintiffs' pigs.
Accordingly, the contract included the following terms: (1)
that the hopper would be suitable for the Plaintiff's requirements
- an express term: (2) that the hopper, would have a ventilated
n
top - an express term: (3) that the hopper was of merchantable
quality - an implied term under Section 14 (2) of the Sale of
Goods Act: (4) that the hopper was reasonably fit for storing
pignuts to be fed to. the Plaintiff's pigs - an implied term
under Section 14(l) of the Sale of Goods Act.
The Plaintiffs say that the Defendants were in breach of the
contract in that the hopper, as delivered, was not suitable for
their requirements, did not have a ventilated top, and was not
reasonably fit for storing pignuts to be fed to their pigs. They
claim damages for the heavy losses they sustained from the death
and sickness of a great number of pigs caused by food rendered
unfit by bad storage conditions in the un-ventilated hopper.
As I understand Mr. Drake Q.C. for the Defendants (Appellants
in this Court), he does not challenge the presence in tbhe
contracy of the terms I have listed. He submits, however, that
there were two contracts, not one: the sale of the hopper and
a contract for its installation. The hopper, he says, complied
with the contract. The trouble was that it was installed on site
without proper caa?e in that the cowl on the top of the hopper
j
was not adjusted to its lifted, or fully open position. He
admits, therefore, a breach of the installation contract, but
22*

denies any breach of the contract of sale.
A
I do not accept Mr. Drake's analysis- of two contracts. I
think there was only one - for the sale and delivery of a hopper
with a ventilated top reasonably fit for the purpose which the
Plaintiffs had explained to the Defendants. But I think that
B
the result of this case must he the same f whichever way the
contractual position is analysed.
The actual, or imputed knowledge of the parties was the same,
whatever the breach which caused the damage. More particularly,
C
the Defendants knew that an unventilated hopper was not suitable
for the Plaintiffs' requirements, i.e. the bulk storage of pig-
nuts in a condition fit to be fed to the Plaintiffs' pigs. It
*
cannot, therefore,matter whether this unsuitability arose from
D
a breach of contract in its installation or from a breach of
warranty.
At the trial there developed a very complicated dispute about
a great isany issues, all of which, save that of remoteness of
E
damage, have ceased to be live issues. But, as can be seen
from Mr. Justice Swanwick's very careful judgment, they
bedevilled both the advocates and the witnesses. In particular,
Mr. Bathurst, fighting hard for his clients, the Plaintiffs, had
F
to repel attacks from so many different quarters that he was not
always facing the same way or aiming his shafts of argument in
the same direction. It is only fair that one should approach,
„
as the trial Judge did, the Plaintiffs1 evidence bearing in mind
that they came to Court to meet, inter alia, a defence that the
Plaintiffs were themselves the cause of their own loss in that
they knew or ought to have known that the pignuts were poisonous
H
- a case which assorts ill with the point, which alone is now
taken, that the possibility of serious illness arising from the
23.

mouldy pignuts Was not known vr appreciated "by anyone„ save perhaps
a very few experts, at the time of the contract.
To complete the history of the hopper, it was delivered on the
2nd August, 1971. As installed by the Defendants, its cowl was
shut - a fact which the Judge found the Plaintiffs could not be
expected to detect. On the 22nd September the Plaintiffs'
B
Veterinary Surgeon, Mr. Fletcher, reported that the herd was in
good health. On the 20th September Mr. Parsons had noted pig-
nuts, lighter in colour than they ought to have been,, coming out
•*
of the base of the hopper. By early October, some of the nuts
C
(but not very many) emerging from the hopper wer^ "white with
bluey green specks" - definitely off-colour. But Mr. Parsons
was not troubled: the herd was in good health. Disturbing signs
of ill-health were evident by the 9th October. Mr. Parsons was
D
now concerned, and, not unnaturally, suspected a link between
the condition of his sows and the observed condition of some of
the pignuts. He telephoned the suppliers of the nuts. On the
10th he called in Mr. Fletcher again. By the 11th, some 70 sows,
E
21 of them suckling, were affected. On the 12th the supplier's
representative made an inspection, took away some nuts for
examination, and advised that in the meantime bagged nuts, in place
j.
of those in ;the hopper, should be fed to the pigs. This was done:
and from 13th October no food was fed from the hopper until after
the Defendants had located the source of the trouble and opened
the top ventilator, and the hopper had been thoroughly cleansed.
G
The health of most of the sows improved rapidly with the switch
from the hopper nuts to bagged nuts. No more adult pigs were
affected but from the 21st October onwards piglets weaned from
the affected sows began to die. The herd was afflicted by an
H
outbreak of an intestinal infection known as "B coli". The
24.

B
D
medical chemistry is not important: for it is admitted that the
outbreaks of "E coli" which continued to cause injury and death
amongst later litters were due to the "roll-on" effect of the
disease. The Plaintiffs claim that they have lost 254 pigs dead,
a substantial sum of gross profit, and have incurred additional
costs and expenses in combatting and mastering the outbreak.
The Defendants say that the Plaintiffs can recover only the extra
cost of the bagged food - a sum of 08.02.
The outbreak of "F coli", which did the damage, was, as
found by the Judge and now conceded by the Defendants, caused
by the mouldy condition of the nuts fed from the hopper. It is
also conceded, as the Judge also found, that the lack of top
ventilation in the hopper caused this condition. But it is the
Dcfendant's case that at the time of the contract the parties
could not have reasonably contemplated that nuts, rendered mouldy
by lack of hopper ventilation, would cause serious illness, such
as "B coli", in the Digs that fed on them.
A formidable volume of expert evidence upon this point was:
deployed for the consideration of the Judge. His findings as to
the contemplatability of E. coli was as follows: "I would not
„
consider that I would bo justified in finding that in the spring
of 1971 at the time of the contract either a farmer in the
position of the Plaintiffs or a hopper manufacturer in the
position of the Defendants would reasonably have contemplated
Q
that there was either a very substantial degree of possibility
or a real danger or serious possibility that the fee-ding of
mouldy pignuts in the condition described by Mr, Parsons would
cause illness in the pigs that ate them, even on an intensive
H
farm such as that of the Plaintiffs".
The Plaintiffs, by-their Respondent's notice, challenge this;
25.

finding. I have done my best to study the evidence as it appears
A
from the detailed and i^ucid judgment under appeal. I confess
that I think I might well have reached a different conclusion:
but bearing in mind the inevitable limitations upon an appellate
Court's consideration of such a question and the great advantages
B
available to the Judge, and most assuredly used to the full by
him, I think it would be wrong to disturb his finding.
But it is necessary to note the essence - and the limits -
of the finding. It is a finding that the parties could not
C
reasonably be supposed to have had in contemplation that there
was a serious possibility of mouldy nuts causing illness in the
plaintiff's pigs. It is not a finding that they could not
reasonably have had in contemplation that a hopper unfit for its
purpose of storing food in a condition suitable for feeding to
the pigs might well lead to illness.
The Judge's other findings of fact may be summarised as
follows: He found that there was a warranty - its existence is
III
not disputed by the defendants •» to the effect that the hopper
should be reasonably fit for the purpose of storing pignuts in a
condition suitable for feeding to the plaintiff's pigs. He
P
found that the hopper, being unventilated, was not so fit; that
this defect was a breach of the warranty, and that the pignuts-
were unfit by reason of the breach. He found that the plaintiffs'
loss was caused by the breach of warranty. Upon the basis of these
Q
findings, the judge held that since the first question is whether
"the damage" claimed arises in the ordinary course of things from
from the breach, "there is no need to have recourse to the
question of the presumed contemplation". He then considered the
H
meaning of the implied term "pleaded and admitted" that the hopper
should be reasonably fit for the purpose of storing pignuts to be
26 *

fed to the Plaintiffs pigs and reached the conclusion, which I
respectfully think was inevitable, that it meant that, in so far
as proper storage could achieve it, the hopper would keep the
pignuts in a condition such as not to make the Plaintiffs' pigs
ill. He stressed the importance to be attached to the particular
B
nature of 'this herd of pigs - a very different set of animals
from the ordinary farm-yard pig - and to the intensive nature
of the Plaintiffs' farming operation, all of which matters were
made known to the Defendants before contract. He stated his
C
conclusion in these words: " On this interpretation the
inevitable conclusion from the findings I have already made
would be that this hopper was not reasonably fit for that purpose
_
and that this caused the nuts to become toxic and that the
D
illness of the pigs was a direct and natural consequence of such
breach and toxicity, and that the Plaintiffs do not have to prove
that the toxicity or its results were foreseeable to either party.
F
To put it another way, once the question of foreseeability of the
breach is Eliminated, as it is by the absolute warranty, the
consequences of the breach flow naturally from it".
Mr. Drake criticises strongly this part of the judgment. He
p
says it is based on a misunderstanding of Hadley v. Baxendale:
and he referred us to the well-known passage in Lord Reid's speech
in Czamikow v. Koufos where, at page 385, he said that it is
not enough that in fact the Plaintiff's loss was directly caused
G
"by the Defendant's breach of contract, Lord Reid said: "The
crucial question is whether, on the information available to
the defendant when the contract was made, he should, or the
reasonable man in his position would, have realised that such
H
loss was sufficiently likely to result from t he breach of
contract to make it proper to hold that the loss flowed naturally
27.

from the "breach or that loss of that kind should have been within
A
his contemplation".
Notwithstanding his choice of language, I think the Judge was
making the approach which, according to Lord Reid, is the correct
one. He was saying, in effect, that the parties to this contract
B
must have appreciated that, if, as happened in the event, the
hopper, unventilated, proved not to be suitable for the storage
of pignuts to be fed to the plaintiffs' pigs, it was not unlikely,
there was a serious possibility, that the pigs would become ill.
C
The Judge put it in this way at pages 32 and 33 of his transcript:
"The natural result of feeding toxic food to animals is damage
to their health and may be death, which is what occurred, albeit
from a hitherto unknown disease and to particularly susceptible
D
animals. There was therefore no need to invoke the question of
reasonable contemplation in order to make the defendants liable"
(my underlining).
„
The judge in this critical passage of his judgment is
Hi
contrasting a natural result, i.e. one which people placed as these
parties were would consider as a serious possibility, with a
special, specific result, i.e. E coli disease which, as he later
p
found, the parties could not at the time of contract reasonably
have contemplated as a consequence. He distinguishes between
"presumed contemplation" based on a special knowledge from
ordinary understanding based upon general knowledge and concludes
Q
that the case falls within the latter category. He does so
because he has held that the assumption, or hypothesis, to be
made is tint the parties had in mind at the time of contract not
a breach of warranty limited to the delivery of mouldy nuts but
H
a warranty as to the fitness of the hopper for its purpose. The
assumption is of the parties asking themselves not what is likely
28.

to happen if the nuts are mouldy, but what is likely to happen
A
to the pigs if the hopper is unfit for storing nuts suitable to
be fed to them. While, on his finding, nobody at the time of
contract could have expected E coli to ensue from eating mouldy
nuts, he is clearly - and;1 as a matter of common sense, rightly
B
- saying that people would contemplate, upon the second assumption,
the serious possibility of injury and even death among the pigs.
And so the question becomes - was he right to make the
assumption he did? In my judgment, he was - see Grant v.
Australian Knitting Mills (1936) Appeal Cases 85, and particularly
the well-known passage in the speech of Lord Wright between pages
97 and 100.
I would agree with Mr. McGregor in his work on Damages (13th
Edition) at page 131 (last line) that "in contract as in tort,
it should suffice that, if physical injury or damage is within
the contemplation of the parties, recovery is not to be limited
because the degree of physical injury or damage could not have
E
been anticipated". This is so, in my judgment, not because there
is, or ought to be, a specific rule of law governing cases of
physical injury but because it would be absurd to regulate
damages in such cases upon the necessity of supposing the parties
F
had a prophetic foresight as to the exact nature of the injury
that does in fact arise. It is enough if upon the hypothesis
predicated! physical injury must have been a serious possibility.
Though in loss of market or loss of profit cases the factual
G
analysis will be very different from cases of physical injury,
the same principles, in my judgment, apply. Given the situation
of the parties at the time of contract, was the loss of profit,
or market, a serious possibility, something that would have been
in their minds had they contemplated breach?
29.

It does not matter, in my judgment, if they thought that the
A
chance of physical injury, loss of profit, loss of market, or
other loss as the case may he, was slight or that the odds were
against it provided they contemplated as a serious possibility
the type of consequence, not necessarily the specific consequence,
B
that ensued upon breach. Making the assumption as to breach that
the judge did, no more than commonsense was needed for them to
appreciate that food affected by bad storage conditions might
well cause illness in the pigs fed upon it.
C
As I read the judgment under appeal, this was how the judge,
whose handling of the issues at trial was such that none save one
survives for our consideration, reached this decision. In my
judgment, he was right, upon the facts as found, to apply the
D
first rule in Hadley v. Baxendale, or, if the case be one of
breach of warranty, as I think it is, the rule in Section 53(2)
of the Sale of Goods Act without inquiring as to whether, upon a
juridical analysis, the rule is based upon a presumed contemplation.
E
At the end of a long and complex dispute the judge allowed
common sense to prevail. I would dismiss the appeal.
(Order: Appeal dismissed with costs. Leave to appeal
to the House of Lords granted on condition that there
is no application to vary order as to costs here and
below and that appellants should pay respondents1 costs
in the House of LordsH
G
H
30.
