;;AR LIBR/r
/t\<>VM COURTS OF IW 1
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF JUDICATURE
COURT OP APPEAL
(Appeal of Plaintiffs from Order
of Mr. Justice Whitford, London,
February 5, 1976.)
Royal Courts of Justice,
Tuesday, 8th February, 1977*
Before:
LORD JUSTICE CAIRNS
LORD JUSTICE ROSKILL and
LORD JUSTICE BRIDGE.
/rrt &?&0
v/^-
P0N5F0RD and Ors.
(ADpellants -
Plaintiffs)
CHurr* ^ ZT^^f: ^L^rsrti
f£*e>eyv?K &&&>
/te^u?Ofrrto^i
-v-
H.M.S. AEROSOLS LTD.
(Respondents
Defendants)
r7^t> ( ,L ***<*->* / ** -^-^
/HL>
T C ^ - ^ s i r i~~i~-
J~^ 7
^>-7
'-rfl?
ju£-yznr£
J U D G M E N T

A 1 S T H S s p g R E M E G 0 U R T 0F JUDICATURE.
COURT OF APPS&L*
(Appeal of Plaintiffs from Order
B of Mr* Justice Whitford, London,
February 3, 1976.)
Royal Court a of Justice.,
Tuesday. 8th February. 1977.
Before:
LORD JUSTICE CAIRSS.
LORD JUSTICE ROSKILL and
LORD JUSTICE BRIDGE.
D
P0B3P0RD and Org,
-v*»
H.M.3. AEROSOLS LTD.
(Appellants •
Plaintiffs)
(Respondents
Defendants)
(Transcript of the Shorthand Hotes of the Association of Official
Shorthandwrltere, Ltd., Room 592 Royal Courts of Justice, and 2,
Hew Square, Lincoln9s Ian, London, W.C.2.)
MR L. PRICE. Q.C. and MR BRUCE COLES, (instructed by Messrs• Qamlens)
appeared on behalf of the Appellants
( P l a i n t i f f s ) ,
G MR Do NICHOLLS. Q«C. and MR B. RICH, (instructed by Mesars. Tarlo,
~ rons & AukinJ appeared on behalf of the Respondents (Defendants).
H
J U D O M E H T .
1.

A X.CRB JUSTXCSS QkXBMZt This is An appeal fyoa A lodgment ©f Mr. Justice
Whitford la proceedings to decide the meaning of a pent review
clause In a lease*
Too lease was dated 19th August, 1968, and by
It the plaintiff a1 prsdeeesso**, as lessors, granted to the
B
defendants, ae lessees, a lease of a factory for 81 years from the
84th June, 1988.
The rant was to bo £9,000 a year for too first
seven years, bnt for the seeond seven years and the third seven years
It was to be £9#000 a year or a reasonable rent for the demised
C
premises if higher.
In default of agreement such rent was to be
determined by a surveyor.
In 1969 the premises were burnt down.
They were rebuilt
from proceeds of fire insurance <, but, at the expense of the defend-
D
ants, the factory was improved by making certain additions*
Such
Improvements required the licence of the lessors, which was granted*
When it cans to assessing the rent for the seeond ssven«ye&r period
the plaintiffs claimed that the rent should be assessed as a
reasonable rent for the pre sloe a as they then were, without regard
to their history.
The defendants contended that the rent should
bo a reasonable rent for the premises without the improvements which
p
they had paid for.
As the parties oould not agree, a surveyor was
appointed, and the plaintiffs then took proceedings by originating
summons to obtain a decision in the court as to which WAS the proper
basis of assessment for the surveyor to apply*
Mr* Justice Whitford
G
dael^d in favour of the defendants, and the plaintiffs appeal.
There was a second question raised by the originating summons9 but
the decision on it is not under appeal.
The relevant terms of the lease were as follows.
It was a
H
leas® of a factory at Barking, called in the lease "the demised
8.

A
previses** for »1 year a from the Bath Jane, 1968, yielding and
paying a yearly rant at £0,000 "toping the first fl«wn year a of
tha aaid tarn sad daring tha aaaand and third seven yeare of tba
tar a «*»o tba ams of SXKB THO&aABD POUHDS aforasaid or aneb ana
B
whichever ba tba higher an shall ba assessed as a raaaanable rant
far tba demised premises far tha appropriate period auob aaaesssnat
to ba aada in tba following aannar that la to any;
(a) Snob aaaeaa-
aent aa aball ba agraad between tha parties hereto in writing19 -
C
and there ware aertaln provisions aa to tba d&te by which that
agreement aheold ba reaahad - "(b) In tha event of the partiaa
hereto failing to roach suoh agreesent aa aforaaaid on or before
the dates appointed •••• then tha reaaonable rant for the eaoond
D
and third periods aball ba fl2ed or assesses by an independent
surveyor ee«»n
Then there followed provisions for tha appolntaent
of a aursayor by agreement of the partiaa, or failing agreement,
appolntaent by the ?re aidant for tha tiae being of tha Royal
E
Institute of Chartered Surveyora*
Tba leaseea' covenants contained a repairing covenant, and
a covenant by sub-clause (10) that the leaseea "Will not commit waste
F
nor mato any additions to or external or atmotural alterations in
the demised pres&sea without the consent In writing of tha Leaaor
first had and obtained•"
Than in sub-clause (21) a covenant not,
without consent in writing, not to be unreasonably withheld, to
G
great any further building erection or Imps*avowantg and so forth.
Tha licence for the Improveoanta whioh were in fact mafia was
a doous&nt dated 14th Sovea&er, 1909, where in Clause 1 it Is
proviSadf
"The Landlords hereby grant anto tha Tenant a licence to
"
©secufco In and upon the demised premises tha savoral alterations and
3 .

A
works indicated in the plan annexed •**•*
and Clsase 3i
"Xt la
hereby agreed end declared that aXX the lessees* cor©Dante and
conditions contained in the Lease which are now applieabXe to the
premises demised thereby ehaXX continue to be applicable to the
B
same when and as aXtered and shall extend to all additions whioh
cay be made thereto in the COUPS© of such alterations .n
The improvements and additions that were made were substantia
and oest the defendants £31*780.
Xt is common ground that once the improvements had been made
the additions to the premises became Included in the demised
premises*
Considering simply the words of the elause we have to
construe, the rent review clause, I have some difficulty in seeing
D
how a reasonable rent for the whole of the demised (remises ean be
assessed by determining a reasonable rent for part of the premises.
In eertain statues it has been expressly provided that
rents to be determined by arbitration or by the court are to be
E
fixed without regard to improvemsnts made by the tenant.
One such
provision is in Section 8 of the Agricultural Holdings Aet 1948,
whioh relates to arbitration to assess the rent cf an agricultural
F
holding in certain circumstances.
Another is Section 34 of the
Landlord and Tenant Aot 1954, as amsadsd by the Law of Property Act
1969, which relates to the assessment by the court of the rent for
a new tenancy of business premises granted under Pert XX of the Act
G
of 1954.
Xt may be said that those provisions indicate Parliament'^
view that a tenant who has paid for improvements should not have to
pay an Increased rent beeause of them*
On the other hand, it may
be oaid that Parliament by making soon express previsions recognised
that without them the arbitrator or the court would have to assess
the rent for the jpemioes as they steed with the improvements.
4.

A
&». Jtoaelee Whitferd tea* lot© eeeeust that i f at tbe
aspiration air the lease a new lease way® to fee granted trader the
Act of 1084 the tqerovenssta weald, wader seotloa d4, fall to be
loft eat of aaeeaat*
Xfc weald bo, be suggested, absurd if the
B
plaintiffs could obtain for fourteen years a rant bringing Into
actaunt the iBqpreveaeats, find then under a now leas© that faeter
bad to be left eat of ©cermet* 8r« Price, for the plaintiffa,
points oat that thie wouM net neeeaaarlly ooan that tbe rant would
C
have to be reduced for a new lea©©* by 1889 all rants may base
rloan ao saob that no reduction would oeour.
Rr« Justice Wbi<6ford alao oonaiderad what the position would
have been if the tenant had allowed the premises to fall into
D
disrepair«
If tbe defendants are right in their contentions hare,
would it nsan that if the premises were by their default in
disrepair at the end of the first seven years that disrepair would
E
have to be left out of account in assessing the revised rant.
Hr,
Price's answer to fshat is that in that oase the tenants would be
estopped from relying on their own default •
fir* 91cholla, for the defendants* naturally stresses the
F
apparent unfairness to the defendants, who by greatly improving the
plaintiffs* property *euld, on the plaintiffe» contentions, have to
pay for the laproveaeata twice over, once ir\ the astual coat of the
wer&s and then fin an iaereaaed rent.
That this is hard on the
G
tenants mist be eoaeedad*
It is pointed out that under Seat ion 19
(9) of the LeMlerd and Tenant Act 1987 the plaintiffs could set
have required m inareaaed rent as a condition of granting a licence
for tbe iBQreveaeats*
But that section la not concerned with rent
H
review olausetfj, and if the defendants have in faot agreed to terras
5*

A
which work unfortunately far tees it la not for the court te
relieve them of their bargain.
BSJKS Mr* Hioholle says that the purpose of rent review la
atmply to eepe with Inflation,
That la no doubt the mala purpose
B
of such a olanae, interpreting the word "inflation* in a vide sense,
to include not enly a fall In the value of the pound, hut a general
lnoreaae in letting values*
There can, however, be no doubt that
under the olauee we are eonaiderlng other factors would have to be
taken into account when a reasonable rent i s assessed*
for example.
any improvetaents made at the landlords' expense or any Improvement a
or deterioration in the neighbourhood which affected the value of
the property.
D
Two eases vere olted to us where the court has considered
statutory provisions enabling the court to fix a reasonable rent,
and has Interpreted statutory language In a way which took into
account factors other than the market value of the premises at the
E
time when the rent was assessed.
The oases are John Kay Ltd. «v»
Kay (1952 8 Q.B. p.258) in the court of appeal, and Snglleh Kxportera
(London) Ltd. -v- Bldorarall (1973 1 Ch. p.415), a decision of Mr,
p
Juatioe Megarry.
In the first of these oases the Act concerned
was the Leasehold Property (Temporary Provisions) Act 1951, Section
12 of which required the court to consider "all the circumstances
of the ease19.
The second authority concerned the fixing of an
G
interim rent under Section 24A of the act of 1964, added by the Law
of Property Act 1989, and the key words were, r,V$nt which it would
be reasonable for the tenant to pay0*
I do not eonslder that
these authorities assist in the construction of the relevant clause
H
in the present ease.
6.

A
$b# Bearest ease to the present is another decision of Mr.
Justice Hegarry in the unreported ease of ftuff »v«» 3* & y« stone
Property Company Ltd,, doelded on the 25th December, 1979*
X anal
read some passages from the transcript of the jndgmant to ahow the
similarities with the present ease and the differences, and the
reasoning by whioh &r« Justice Hegarry reaohed a conclusion
consonant with the plaintiffs' contention here.
On page 2 of the
transcript the learned Judge saids
"In 1945 the plaintiff, to whom
C
X shall refer as 'the landlord', granted a 21~yeara lease of
business prenlses to a company called jr« & p. Stone lighting & Radl
Limited, whioh X shall oall the 'Lighting Company'. The lease was
at the modest rent of £876 a year, rising by stages to £985*
Xn
D
1954 the Lighting Company sought and obtained the landlord's
permission to make oertaln substantial alterations to the premises;
and in due course the work was done,
These were building
alterations whioh materially increased the area of the buildings.
"In 1966, when the lease was running to its end, there were
proceedings in the Bow County Court in whioh the Lighting Company
sought a new tenancy under the Landlord and Tenant Act 1064.
p
On the 3rd March, 1966, the Court made an order for the grant of
a new tenancy at a rent of '£2400 per annua with rent review at
the end of seventh year*
New tenancy for 14 years to commence at
termination of current tenancy.
(Under 3.64 of landlord and
G
Tenant &at}'»
The rent fixed by the court no doubt gave effect
to section 34 of the Landlord and Tenant aot 1964, which included
a provision for the disregarding of '(e) any effect on rent of any
improvement carried out by the tenant or a predecessor in title of
his otherwise than in pursuance of an obligation to his immediate
?.

A
landlord.* Having obtained that order for a new tenancy* the
Lighting Ooeqpaoy requested the landlord to grant the lease net to
i t f but to another company oarasd £• & P» Stone Property Company
Limited, which I shall call tha * Property Company9. That eoapany
B
la the defendant to this auoBens.
There la no evldecce before so
as to t bo relationship between these two coinpaaiee, though on©
would infop from thstr nasee and tha events that there la mm
connection.
C
"A fore of lease was &aly agreed between the landlord and
tha Property Company, and a lease fop 1ft years was granted, bearing
data tha Slat.Kovesber, 1966„
Thla was a damlaa of 'AIL THAT
mseauaga or dvolllngheuso shop and nreaisea lmoran aa SOB&er 60
D
High' straat Sorth in tha London Borough of Kawhaja yogETBSR WITH
the yard or garden thereto*.
In accordance with the order of tha
County Court9 pirovision was mad© for root review.
Tha olaujo in
question roads as follows % »PBQVIDSP ALSO AUD IT 13 HEREBY
S3SCIABBD that tha yearly rant payable by tha Lessee during tha laat
Sevan years of tha tana hereby granted ahall be tha sum of TWO
THfflSAMD POOR HP1CT3P POUBBS aforesaid or such sum aa shall be
F
assessed as a reasouablo' rent for tha d©raised goalees for tha aaid
popiod each assesses* n& to be naado in tha following zaannep that is
to say •••••«"
Than there follow provisions substantially
similar to the laaaa under consideration in thla case.
Having
G
cited those terras, jfche learned judge went on: "Rhsn the rest
review clause fell to he operated* there were at first negotiations
between tha partlea9but in the ecd a surveyor was appointed.
The
valuers of aaoh party nevertheless continued their negotiations*
™
and there* ia aos& evide^&e before oe to the effeot that if tha
8.

A
Improvements are to be disregarded, the root will be something of
the order of £3,500, whereas if the improvements are t o be taton
into aooount, the rent will be of the order of £4,600."
At the top of page 4 the learned Judge said:
*•••• Mr.
B
Priday0 - who was appearing In that case for the tenant - "advanced
no contention, whether baaed on aeotion 34 or otherwise, that the
improvements should be wholly disregarded.
Hie case was that while
he accepted that the Improvement a cheuld not be wholly disregarded,
C
he asserted that, to pat i t shortly, the surv&/or should temper the
of foot to be given to the improvements by what he ojnsldered to be
reasonable."
No such concession was made in the present ease.
The learned judge referred to the ease of John Kay ltd, -v-
Kay, quoting from it the words of Sir Raymond Ever shed. Master of
the Rolls, thus:
"'The reasonable rent id arrived at by applying
the subjective test of what the judge thinks is right and fair, as
distinct, for example, from the objective teat of what the evidence
E
shows i s the mar feet rent.'*
Mr* Justice Hegarry cited the Bldorgfall oaso, and then
continued:
"I go baa* to the lease.
When i t was executed, the
improvements had already been made some twelve years earlier.
The
r
demise plainly included the improvements as being part of the
premises.
Hot a word i s said in the lease about the improvements.
The provision for assessing the rent i s expressed solely in
Q
valuation terras.
There is nothing save the expression 'reasonable
rent' to give oolour to the view that anything save pure matters of
valuation are to be considered.
The ancient principle i s that
what the tenant makes part of the deaisod premises enures for the
H
landlord's benefit, subject to rules suoh as those relating to
9.

A
tenants* fixtures and to any statutory qualifications of the
principle.
Ths United qualification sadd by section 34 (c) of
the landlord and ftsnant Act 1954 (en whloh see Bast Coast Amusement
Company Limited v. British Transport Board (1964 A*C. 68) )
admittedly contributes nothing to the do termination of this ease.
Though thla qualification was relevant when the Bow County Court
was determining the initial rent, the rent for the second seven
years is purely a creature of the lease.
In those circumstances,
C
it seems to me to put an impossibly heavy burden on the word
'reasonable' in thla lease to say that it allows and requires the
surveyor to explore questions of who paid for the Improvement**, and
In appropriate oases to allow some discount for this, calculated on
D
an unspecified bt<iis.
What sort of deduction should be allowed
if the Improves©ata were paid for by the tenant itself, or partly
by the tenant and partly by a subsidiary company, an associated
company, or a related company, or wholly by such a company?
If
one aooepts to the full that 'reasonable* means 'right and fair',
one may s t i l l say that It means 'right and! fair 1 In a valuation
sense, without extending It to the whole range of moral and ethical
p
considerations.
I say nothing of the Improbable case of a
reasonable rent whloh is to be assessed not by a surveyor but by a
philosopher or theologian;
but I do say that in the absence of
provisions sufficiently indicating the contrary, a provision for a
G
reasonable rent to be assessed by a surveyor to be appointed, in
default of agreement, by the President of the Royal Institution of
Chartered Surveyors will not oast the surveyor loose upon uncharted
and perhaps unohartable ethical seas suoh as these*
The word
'reasonable' no doubt requires the surveyor to reject a rent which,
10.

A
though obtainable in the open sarket by reason of special oiroua-
0taaees0 appears to hie to exoeed the rent for the premises which
is right and fair3
bat I do not think that i t does more than that."
Then later Mr* Justice Hegarry aaidt
"The question ia not
B
that of the rent 'which It would be reasonable for the tenant to
payS bat that of 'a reasonable rent for the demised premises',
and that* as it seems to me, is a matter not affected by who paid
for the promise0 or any part of them.
In my vie* the surveyor
mast talcs the premises as he finds them, and then determine what
he considers to be a reasonable rent for those premises, regardless
of who provided them or paid for them."
It is true that Mr* Friday had made a concession in arguing
D
that case which may h%ve hampered his argument;
It is true that
the improvements In that case had been made long before the new
lease was negotiatedi
and It Is also true that the new lease was
agreed upon following proceedings in court under the Act of 1954
1
E
and the grant of a sew lease by the court.
But, nevertheless, I
find the basis on whioh Mr. Justice Kegarry reached his decision to
be directly applicable to the present case, and while It is not
p
binding on us, I treat with great respeot a decision of a judge so
eminent in the field of landlord and tenant;
and, moreover, I find
1,
his reasoning compelling.
Here too the assessment is to be made by a surveyor*
Further,
G
the plaintiffs 1 case, in my opinion, is strengthened by the terms
of the licence whereby a l l the conditions contained in the lease
are to apply to the premises "when and as altered" and «o extend
to wall additions which may be made thereto in the case of such
H
alteration.*
11.

A
i t is net without regret that Z reaoh the conclusion that
the appeal should be allowed and Judgment entered for the plaint If £a,
LORD JUSTICE H03K1LL:
The answer to the question raised In paragraph
1 of the originating summons taken out by tho plaintiff-lessors on
the 9th June, 1978, turns upon the true construction of seven vorda
In Clause 1 of the lease dated 19th August, 1968: °a reasonable
rent for the demised premises".
That lease was for 21 years from
the 24th June, 1968, at a rent of £9,000 per annum for tbo first
C
seven years, and for eaeh of the two ensuing periods of seven years
that sum or suoh sum, whichever be the highest, as shall be
assessed as a reasonable rent for the dealsed premises for the
rolevant period, that assessment to be made if the parties failed
D
to agree by an Independent surveyor appointed In accordance with
the elaborate provisions In the latter part of Clause 1 of the
tease •
„
Shortly after the inception of the lease the demised premises
were damaged by fire.
They were repaired, and In addition the
lessees, with the lleenoe of the lessors, effected extensive
Improvement to the demised premises at a total cost of just under
F
£32,000:
(see the details of the Improvements set out at page 85
of the bundle)•
The licence was granted on the 14th November, 1969,
Clause 5 of the licence, t o which my Lord has referred, but which
I will road, provides:
"It Is hereby agreed and declared that all
G
the Lessees covenants and conditions contained In the Lease which
are now applicable to the premises demised thereby shall continue
to be* applicable to the same when and as altered and shall eoctend
to all additions which may b© mad® thereto In the course of such
alterations•"
IS.

A
Thffl short point that vo have to deold& is whether in deter-
aining the reasonable rent for the demised premises for the second
rjeven^^war period tbe Improvements thna effected by tbe lessees at
their own expense are to be disregarded.
The lessees assert, &nd
Mr. Justice Whit ford has held, that if those improvement! are not
disregarded, they, having spent that not inconsiderable sum the
benefit of which is lllttly to enure to the lessors upon the expiry
of the lease (unless later renewed) in 1089, will have to pay an
C
increased rent on top of their own capital expenditure,, and the
lessors will then be getting a doable benefit.
The lessors, through
the mouth of Mr. Price, accept that that Is so, but assert that that
is the result of the bargain which the parties made when tbe lease
D
was entered into in 1968.
It must be remembered that this lease
was freely negotiated In 1968.
It was not entered into as a result
of any right which the leasees had acquired under the landlord and
r
Tenant Aot 1964.
Two things, at least, are d e e p .
First, these improvements
became, and are, part of the demised premises.
Secondly, all the
covenants in the lease (inoluding the obligation to pay rent and the
F
maintenance and dilapidations obligations) apply to them.
Hr.
Price's argument accordingly has the great marit of attractive
simplicity,
"Look", he says, "at the demised premises.
tfaey
include the improversnts.
Ask yourself what is the reasonable rent
G
to be paid for the demised premises. Including the improvements.
The parties used this straightforward language.
Effect should be
given to that language, which is that which the parties chose. And
if that construction has en untoward result for the leasees, then
H
that is their miefertune.n
13.

A
Mr, Justice Whltford rejected this argument for the reasons
given at pages 1& and 17 of the handle, saying In effect that the
independent surveyor Is not only entitled to, but must have In mind
that these improvements were wholly paid for by the tenants, and
B
that, therefore, i t would be unreasonable that tbs landlords should
expect not only the ultimate benefit of the Improvements, but ssan-
while an increased rent, arising simply because the lessees had
made them, with the licence of the lessors.
C
In the ultimate analysis Z think the question resolves Itself
into thlst
do the words "reasonable rent* simply mean a rent whloh
is reasonable for the demised premises, having regard only to those
premise® and to no other eonsiderations;
or do they mean a rent
D
which is reasonable for the lessors to exact and ttae lessees to pay,
having regard to a l l the circumstances of the case, and, In
particular, to the relationship between them, the relevant olroum-
stances being that all those improvements were effected at the
lessees 1 expense?
It is clear that the parties in drawing up the lease did not
anticipate that which has happened, and accordingly have not
p
expressly provided for the event*
The court has in those circum-
stances to determine what intention must be imputed to the parties;
that i s , what la it that as a matter of the o obstruct Ion of the
words they used in the lease they must be taken to have agreed upon
G
should this unanticipated event occur.
I confess that I shrink
fro© imputing to them a result which seems to me so manifestly
unjust unless either the language used or binding authority ooospells
me to do so*
Such authority as there Is, though entitled to the
greatest respect, does not bind me to cons to that conclusion, and
14.

A
if that oonsluslon It to be re&ebed it must bo booattse of the
language of the lease whieb 2 have quoted.
If one asks vhat
leasees or tenants seeking a lieenoe to make the im$a»ovesente at
their own expense whloh these lessees made, would think that one
B
result would be a contractual liability thereafter to pay an
inoroased rent, I unhesitatingly answer "Hone**
Mr* Siehols prayed in aid two anomalies whloh r-ould follow
if the learned judge were wrong* Kr* Price aooepted the exist once
C
of both these anomalies.
First, Section 19 (2) of the Landlord
and Tenant Act 1987 would have prevented the lessors from exacting
an Increased rent as a send it ion of granting the lloenee to whloh
I have referred*
Secondly, if in 1989 the landlord and Tenant Act
D
1954 is s t i l l in foroe and the lessees olalm a new lease in accord-
ance with Its provisions, Section 34 (1) (o) of that Aot (as amended
in 1969) would compel a court in fixing the new rent for any future
lease to disregard these very improvements whloh the lessors now
E
olalm to have taken into account under tke rent review clause.
Thus, if the lessors are right, the rent will be increased froa 1975
to 1989 because of the inclusion of the improvement element• and then
F
be (subject 9 of course, to any other increases meanwhile due to
inflation or to any other cause) be reduced from 1989 onwards beoause
of the effeot of that statute.
This latter anomaly clearly
Impressed Mr* Justice Whit ford.
G
As to the former, it is certainly remarkable that a rent
review clause can afford so easy an esoaps route from the fetters by
whloh the lessors are bound under the 1937 Act.
Clearly in 1969
when the lieenoe was drafted the lessors could not have exacted this
;
ostra rent as the price of granting the lease*
But on the lessors'
15*

A
argument they $an, through the uee of the rent review clause,
obtain, albeit in relation to a later period, exactly the cane
belief it •
AD argument founded upon anomaly le never entirely
convincing* because where part lea have failed to foresee the
particular event which has happened, and the happening of that
event has to be fitted Into a contractual straightjaoket, it Is
likely that anomalies will follow.
On the other hand, when there
C
are such anonallee as these - and Mr* Price, as I have already said,
did not challenge that they existed - X find It difficult to
Inputs to the parties an intention to contract In such a way as to
produce such a result as is contended for by the lessors.
D
This consequence can be avoided If one construes the phrase
ffa reasonable rent" as meaning a reasonable rent for the demised
jpeniaos as between the parties ooneerned, the one to pay, the
r
other to reoelves
In other words, as something different from the
open market rent, fixed by, &nd only by, referenoe to what the
independent surveyor thinks a willing lessee would be prepared to
pay to a willing lessor for the demised premises for the period in
F
question.
X accept that in some oases what would be a reasonable
rent;, or what would be a reasonable price for goods acid and
delivered, should and will be fixed by reference to open market
considerations and nothing else as between a willing lessor and
G
lessee or a willing buyer and seller j but X know of no rule of
construction ^hich compels that result in all eireumatanoes* hoed*
less of the factual background against which the parties were
contracting, which in the present ease includes the demised premises
In their original unimproved state.
16.

A
ffbat
being ay impression as a matter of eonatruoticn, X
turn to authority to seo whether that suggests a different
conclusion.
By far the strongest support against the view whieh
X am inclined to accept as a oat tor of construction is In the
unreported decision of tfr« Justice Begarry in Cuff *>v«» J. & ?«
Stone Breoerty Company I&cU» deolded on the 13th December, 1973
{to which Mp. Jnstice Bfeit ford's attention was not drawn)» where
the relevant words were identical, though the faetaal bao^reand
C
was different•
Beyond all doubt the reasoning of the learned
Judge* which on a matter of this kind is entitled to the greatest
weight and respect* Is opposed to the view that 1 am inclined to
take as a matter of the construction of the rpesent lease*
But
D
Z regard the different factual background as Important.
First,
the Improvements there In question had been made some twelve years
before the date of the lease, and therefore the phrase "the demised
E
sremises" in the lease clearly inoluded at the date of its execution
those {remises as improved twelve years earlier*
Seoondly, the
lease had been entered into following an application to the court
under the 1984 Act at a rental* and for a period of fourteen years
F
(including a rent review clause operative at seven years), all fixed
by the eourt, though it seems from the learned judge's judgment
that the terms of the new lease* including the actual terms of the
rent review clause in question* had been a matter of dtreot
G
negotiation between the parties*
Thirdly* counsel for the lessors
appears to have conceded (see the judgment at page 4) that those
improvements were not simply to be disregarded* a concession the
corrootc&es of which X respectfully question (though Mr* Justice
H
Bogsswy did not) having regard to the wide terms of Section 34 (1) (©)

A
and Seat lea 34 (38) of the 1954 Aet.
One wonders whether had that
concession not boon mode the learned lodge weald necessarily haw
reached the same conclusion, sine© the faet that It was made, to
my Bind, affected the factual background against uhloh the cruelal
B
words had to be construed*
Jt that construction had had to be
approached upon the footing that the improvements in question had
to be disregarded - as presumably they had been disregarded in
accordance with the statute - when the court fIxod the first rent
C
of £2,400 the learned judge might, though I do not presume to say
would» have arrived at a different conclusion*
But whether or not
this is right, I must and do, accept that the concluding paragraph
In the learned judge's judgment suggests an approach to the
D
construction of the relevant words different from that which I am
disposed to tales of the matter of the construction of the present
lease.
I naturally hesitate to differ from Mr* Justice Hegarry on
a matter of this kind*
Moreover* I do not think, with a l l respect
E
to his view to the contrary, that an experienced surveyor would
find it difficult to make the appropriate exclusions when arriving
at what he regarded as the appropriate figure for a reasonable rent.
F
On the other hand* the decision of this court in John Kay Ltd*
«»•-. Kay (1953 8 Q.B* p.258), to which Mr. Justice tfegarry referred,
but which he distinguished, does emphasise the difference between a
mar last rent and a reasonable rent, which latter rani It was which
G
was before the court on that occasion, albeit in th& very different
context of a statute long since repealed* namely. Soot ion 13 of the
Leasehold Property (Temporary provisions) Aot 1951*
The relevant
passages are in the judgment gf Sir Raymond Svershed* then Master of
n
the Bolls, at pages 866 and 867 „ and of L- M Justice Jenkins (as he
IS*

A
then was) at pages 676 and 270.
In the former passage the Master
of tha Bolls said:
*X have referred to the conception of
'reasonableness', and he would Indeed be a bold judge who tried to
formulate with precision the significance that the word Implies.
One i s Inevitably, sooner or later, thrown bads upon generalities
of the kind I have already quoted from Lord Greene, M.R. This much
oust be clears
the standard la that which Is regarded as reasonable
by the judge who tries the ease, and which i s or may he something
C
distinct from standards which may be found to be appropriate »y
applying other teats •"
Then on page 867 he selds
"The market
value of certain premises i s one thing, and as I read this Act it
seems to me that the 'reasonable' rent may he something different.
The reasonable rent is arrived at by applying the subjective test of
jrhat the judge thinks i s right and fair, as distinct, for ©sample,
f.r»om the objective test of what the evidence shows is tbe market
E
value ,n
Lord Justice Jenkins, in the first of the passages to which
I have referred, at page 275, says;
"I cannot agree that 'such rent
as the court lln a l l the circumstances thinks reasonable' means the
F
rent which the property would fetch i f put up In the open market as
property to l e t .
If that had been Intended by the legislature, I
cannot but feel that the section would .have been framed in very
different language •"
Then on page 276 he said:
°Xn my view that
u
form of words9 - that is the form of words in the statut e «• was
plainly used with the intention of giving the court the greatest
latitude in the matter and not tying it down to the figure found to
represent the actual contemporary letting value in tbe open market*"
Finally, on page 877 he said:
"If the only power the court had was
19.

A
to ascertain and f i s the open market rent as the reasonable rent
to be paid under a new tenancy, plainly this legislation, so far
as it i s ©oncernod with shop tenants, would be in a g*«at measure
defeated, because the whole difficulty which has to be cast i s that,
in conditions of scarcity, the open mar last value may be f creed up
to a point which due a exceed a l l reason .*
This decision i s , of course, in no way conclusive of the
present ease, for It la a decision upon a statute quite differently
C
expressed from the language of the present lease, but i t does
suggest that it may in some contexts be legitimate in fixing a
reasonable rent not just to look at the open market rent, but to
look at what is reasonable between the parties themselves; what Is
reasonable for the particular lessor to exact and the particular
lessee to be required to pay*
Accordingly, seeing the anomalies to which the contrary view
E
gives r i s e , and the Inherently unjust result (as I think) of
allowing the lessors to receive extra rent from the lessees In
respect of Improvements for which the lessees alone have paid, I do
not feel compelled to yield to Mr, Price's excellent arguments.
F
In reaching this conclusion I am conscious of the strength of the
opposite view which appeals to my Lord a, and X am naturally most
hesitant in not following Mr. Justice Megsrry'a reasoning in a field
In which he is so expert.
Nevertheless, 4S a natter of the
G
construction of this lease I find myself in complete agreement with
the conclusion of Mr* Justice Whltford, and I would dismiss the
appeal«
But, as X understand Sis* Gordon Wlllmer agrees with my
Lord, the order of the court must be as they propose*
H
80,

A SXB GG80C8 xaiJMSRt Ky lords have pat a* In an embarrassing pee It ion.
As a casual visitor to tho court X find myself in tho position of
having to give tho easting vote which will determine tho outcome of
tho appeal,
As Lord Rustic© Koeklll has Just said, tho view which
X have tatasn is in agreament with that of X*pd Justice Cairns*
Therefore, in my Judgment* this appeal should bo allowed.
Like Lord «7ttstioe Cairns, X have reached this conclusion
with regret, for X on fully conscious zt tho fact that nr%m> facie
C
this result may seem to bo Tory unfair on tho la slices, who her© mate
tho Improvements to tho promises and paid for thorn for tho ultimate
bonofit of tho lessors, and now are invited in addition to their
previous expense to pay a rent which will tain into consideration
the very Improvements which they themselves have made*
X am also
oonasions that this decision may be full of possible anomalies at
the end of tho 21 years term If there should then bo an application
E
for a new lease, in which case, by statute* tho value of the
improvements will fall to bo excluded.
But I do not think emotive
considerations such as these help In the solution of tho problem
with which wo are faced.
F
This case, in my Judgment, turns upon a pure question of
construction of those few words in the lease to which sy Lord has
already referred,
X have come to the conclusion that those words
which have to bo construed, namely, °a reasonable rent for the
G
demised promls^a", are too strong and too otear to leave room for
tho argument put forward on behalf of the leasees*
X need not
read Clause 3 of the license again} all X desire to say is that it
does Rafts it quite clear that the improvement a which have been addad
H
at tho expense of the defendants are now part of tho demised premises*
SI.

A
Om» attention has been drown* as oath aq't Lords have a tat ad,
to the decision of Mr • Justice Magarry In the unreported oase of
guff «v» J. ft Fo atone Property Ooaoaoy ttd> where these wry same
words were construed by htm.
I agree that tho background feats in
that ease wara in certain respects notarially different from tho
background faets In the present oase*
But tho reasoning which
impellrd Mr. Justice JSegarry to his conclusion seems to me to be
abundantly applicable to tho circumstances of the present ease*
C
What Mr. Justice Ksgarry said has already been read* and I need not
read It all again, but X do stress that at the very end of his
judgment he made this remark: "The question is not that of the
rent 'which it would be reasonable for the tenant to pay*, but that
D
of *a reasonable rent for the demised premises1 *j that is to say*
the premises which now isolude the improvements •
X prefer the
reasoning of Mr* Just lee Begarry in that oase to that of Mr. Justice
Whit ford In the present ease.
It may be that if Sir* Justice
Whit ford had had tho advantage of seeing Mr* Just lea Begarry's Judg-
ment, as we have, he might have corns to a different conclusion*
As X see it, therefore, tho question is not as to the
jr
reasonableness of the rent as between these two particular parties,
but what la a reasonable rent for tho premises; that la to say,
it is a question to be approached objectively.
X venture to stress
that point, because it Is not impossible that at soma time In the
G
future this lease may be assigned.
That is certainly a matter In
the contemplation ©f the parties, because there is a clause in the
lease which deals with that possibility.
Is it to be said that a
possible assignee would be in any way concerned with circumstances
peculiar t© these two particular parties who are before us now?
88.

What he would be oonoerned with would be to pay a reasonable rent
for the demised premised*
As has been pointed oat. the demised
premises include the additions and impro'vems nts in aooordanoe with
the licence which is stated to be applicable to the premises,
"when and as altered"•
That, as has been said, naans that the
demised premises now Include these alterations and additions, and
it Is for that that a reasonable rent is to be paid.
As I said
before, I find those simple words too strong and too compelling to
give room for the argument on behalf of the lessees*
That being so, I join with Lord Justice Cairns in the view
that this appeal should be allowed.
(Appeal allowed, with costs in the court
of appeal and below*
Leaver to appeal
to the House of Lords on condition that
rent Is paid at. the rate of £20,000 a
year until It is decided aot to appeal or
the appeal is dealt with, subjeot to the
undertaking that i f the rent is found to
be ©5EuSsslv9 it will be repaid*)
H
23*
