Neutral Citation Number: [2012] EWCA Civ 1039

Case No: B3/2011/1846
IN THE COURT OF APPEAL (CIVIL DIVISION)
ON APPEAL FROM THE DERBY COUNTY COURT
(SITTING IN NORTHAMPTON)
Mr RECORDER BURNS

Royal Courts of Justice
Strand, London, WC2A 2LL

Date: 26 July 2012
Before:

THE LORD CHIEF JUSTICE OF ENGLAND AND WALES
THE MASTER OF THE ROLLS
And
THE VICE-PRESIDENT OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

Between:

CHRISTOPHER SIMMONS

Appellant

 - and –

DEREK CASTLE
Respondent

(Transcript of the Handed Down Judgment of
WordWave International Limited
A Merrill Communications Company
165 Fleet Street, London EC4A 2DY
Tel No: 020 7404 1400, Fax No: 020 7831 8838
Official Shorthand Writers to the Court)

David Sanderson (instructed by Shoosmiths) made written submissions for the Appellant
Andrew Davis (instructed by Greenwoods) made written submissions for the Respondent

Hearing date: 26 July 2012

Judgment
As Approved by the Court

Crown copyright©

The Lord Chief Justice:
1.
This is the judgment of the Court arising out of an application to approve a settlement
of an appeal brought in a personal injury action.
2.
Because the terms of settlement involve the appeal being allowed, albeit through an
agreed variation in the order made by the court below, it requires the consent of the
Court of Appeal. Normally, such consent is given in writing by a single Lord Justice,
without the need for a hearing. However, the requirement for such consent on this
appeal provides an appropriate opportunity for this court to announce an increase in
general damages in most tort actions with effect from 1 April 2013.
3.
The present appeal arises out an award of damages made by Mr Recorder Burns in the
Derby County Court in favour of Christopher Simmons who suffered personal injuries
as a result of being knocked off his motorcycle by a motor car driven by Derek Castle,
who admitted negligence. The Recorder assessed general damages at £20, 000 and
special damages of £2,730.37, each figure carrying an award of interest, and resulting
in a total award of £24,712.72. The Recorder declined to make awards (i) of
provisional damages, (ii) for handicap on the labour market, or (iii) to compensate Mr
Simmons for the risk of future pecuniary loss caused by the risk of medical
deterioration.
4.
Following the grant of permission to appeal to appeal by Patten LJ to Mr Simmons,
Mr Castle made a Part 36 offer, which Mr Simmons decided to accept. The terms of
settlement maintain the award totalling £24,712.72, but go on to provide that, if Mr
Simmons develops ‘fulminant septicaemia resulting in long term disabling illness or
death, which causes … significant ongoing recoverable loss of earnings’, he ‘should
be entitled to apply for further damages …’.
5.
There is no reason not to approve this settlement. While it may not be necessary to
say so (as Mr Simmons is an adult of full capacity), it appears to us that £20,000
seems a correct figure for general damages, and the figure agreed for special damages
also appears to be right.
6.
We turn, then, to the future approach to the measure of general damages in tort
actions.
7.
On 1 April next year, the reforms to civil costs contained in the Legal Aid, Sentencing
and Punishment of Offenders Act 2012 will come into force. Part 2 of the Act
provides for the implementation of recommendations 7, 9, 14 and 94 of the Final
Report on Civil Litigation Costs by Sir Rupert Jackson. These recommendations
form part of a coherent package of reforms, one element of which is that general
damages should rise by 10%: see recommendations 10 and 65 (i). The Lord Chief
Justice, with the unanimous support of the Judicial Executive Board, has previously
announced the judiciary’s support for this package of reforms, as has the Government
following a consultation exercise. The 2012 Act has been introduced by the executive
and enacted by the legislature on the basis that the reforms are a coherent package,
and that the judiciary will give effect to the 10% increase in damages.
8.
As Lord Diplock said in Wright v British Railways Board [1983] 2 AC 773
(‘Wright’), 785A-B, the Court of Appeal ‘with its caseload of appeals in personal
injury actions’ is ‘generally speaking, the tribunal best qualified to set guidelines for
judges trying such actions, particularly as respects non-economic loss’. Lord Woolf
MR said when giving the judgment of the court in Heil v Rankin [2000] EWCA Civ

84, [2001] QB 272 (‘Heil’), para 5, ‘it is clear that Lord Diplock also intended the
Court of Appeal to have the responsibility for keeping guidelines up to date’.
9.
As Lord Woolf MR went on to explain, such an exercise should be carried out by
reference to the ‘existing legal principles as to the assessment’ of damages, which, in
the case of general damages, involves ‘the difficult and artificial task of converting
into monetary damages the physical injury, deprivation and pain and to give judgment
for what it considers to be a reasonable sum– see Heil, paras 20 and 23, quoting Lord
Pearce in H West & Sons Ltd v Shephard [1964] AC 326, 364. Much the same point
was made by Lord Diplock, when he referred to ‘the inescapably artificial and
conventional nature of the assessment of damages for non-economic loss’ – Wright,
784F.
10.
As Lord Woolf MR also said in Heil, para 25, consistency of approach in the
assessment of damages, whether special or general, is ‘important’, partly because it is
a fundamental aspect of justice, and partly because it assists settlement (and see per
Lord Diplock in Wright, 784G-H). Hence the valuable Guidelines for the Assessment
of General Damages for Personal Injury published by the Judicial College (formerly
Judicial Studies Board), which are produced approximately every two years, and
which helpfully and clearly set out the appropriate guidelines for awards of damages
in all types of personal injury action.
11.
At paras 28-9 of Heil, Lord Woolf MR then emphasised ‘the continuous responsibility
of the court’ both ‘to set damages’, and ‘to keep the tariffs up to date’. He then
emphasised that changes could be justified by ‘changes which take place in society’,
and should by no means be confined to changes in the value of money. Again this
reflects what Lord Diplock said in Wright, 785C, that ‘guidelines should be altered if
circumstances relevant to the particular guideline change’.
12.
These observations make it clear that this court has not merely the power, but a
positive duty, to monitor, and where appropriate to alter, the guideline rates for
general damages in personal injury actions. Having said that, it must be acknowledged
that the present circumstances are slightly different from those considered in Heil.
13.
First, we are laying down a principle which will not take effect immediately, but only
in some eight months time. However, there are now many cases proceeding towards a
hearing, which include claims for such damages. Some of those claims may well not
be due to proceed as far as a judgment until after 1 April 2013. Accordingly, it is
appropriate for this court to state the position formally now, well ahead of the date
when it will take effect. However, this has the advantage that proper prospective
warning is give to parties in, or contemplating, litigation – which was not the case in
Heil, causing the court some concern – see at paras 49-51.
14.
Secondly, the increase in general damages we are laying down here extends to tort
claims other than personal injury actions. We cannot see any good reason why the
observations and reasoning in Heil, and in the cases cited by Lord Woolf MR in his
judgment in that case, do not apply equally to general damages in all tort cases.
15.
Thirdly, the increase we are laying down arises from a different set of facts from those
in Heil. It is attributable to the forthcoming change in the civil costs regime initiated
by Sir Rupert’s reforms, as accepted by the executive and enacted by the legislature.
As already explained, the increase was recommended by Sir Rupert as an integral part
of his proposed reforms, which were unconditionally endorsed and supported as such

by the judiciary publicly, and it was plainly on the basis that the 10% increase would
be formally adopted by the judiciary that the 2012 Act was introduced and enacted.
16.
This is, no doubt, an unusual basis on which to rest a judgment or to adjust guidelines.
However the recommendation to adjust the level of damages arises from a report
prepared by a judge, which was initiated by the judiciary (as it was Lord Clarke, who,
as Master of the Rolls, initiated Sir Rupert’s report) and which contains policy
recommendations, which is itself unusual (and, we would add, can only be justified in
relation to a topic as closely concerned with the administration of, and access to,
justice, as legal costs). With the exception of the 10% increase in general damages,
the great bulk of those policy recommendations have been adopted in full by the
legislature in an Act sponsored by the executive, on the clear understanding that the
judges would implement the 10% increase. It would therefore be little short of a
breach of faith for the judiciary not to give effect to the 10% increase in damages
recommended by Sir Rupert.
17.
It is fourthly to be noted that, unlike in Heil, we have not been addressed by counsel
on the issue of increasing the level of general damages. It does not seem to us to be
appropriate, let alone necessary, for us to be so addressed. Quite apart from the points
already made, Sir Rupert consulted widely before publishing his Interim Report and
before publishing his Final Report, and the Ministry of Justice subsequently consulted
on Sir Rupert’s main proposals, and they have also subsequently been debated in (and
out of) Parliament. Unusual though we accept that it is, it seems clear to us that there
would simply be no point in incurring expense and time in going over ground which
has already been well trodden in order to debate a point which will only involve
future judgments and is part of a coherent package, the rest of which has already been
brought into law.
18.
It is worth referring in connection with all these points to another passage in the
speech of Lord Diplock in Wright at 785B, where he explained that, at least as a
matter of strict legal principle, a ‘guideline as to quantum of conventional damages …
is not a rule of law nor is it a rule of practice’. However, as he also explained at 784H,
guidelines, such as those being laid down in this judgment, are ‘addressed’ to first
instance judges, and it is highly desirable that parties to litigation and their advisers
have ‘confidence that trial judges will apply them’.
19.
The only remaining question is precisely how the increase should be applied. We have
concluded that it should apply to all cases where judgment is given after 1 April 2013.
It seems to us that, while it can be said that this conclusion does not achieve perfect
justice in every case, the same thing can be said about any other answer to the
question, particularly in the light of a number of the forthcoming changes being made
to the costs regime pursuant to Sir Rupert’s recommendations. Our conclusion has the
great merits of (i) providing a simplicity and clarity, which are both so important in
litigation, and (ii) according with the recommendation of Sir Rupert, which is
consistent with much of the rationale of the 10% increase in general damages.
20.
Accordingly, we take this opportunity to declare that, with effect from 1 April 2013,
the proper level of general damages for (i) pain, suffering and loss of amenity in
respect of personal injury, (ii) nuisance, (iii) defamation and (iv) all other torts which
cause suffering, inconvenience or distress to individuals, will be 10% higher than
previously. It therefore follows that, if the action now under appeal had been the
subject of a judgment after 1 April 2013, the proper award of general damages would
be 10% higher than that agreed in this case, namely £22,000 rather than £20,000.
