Neutral Citation Number: [2024] EWCA Civ 532
Appeal No: CA-2024-000925
Case No: 1637/5/7/24
IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF ENGLAND AND WALES (CIVIL DIVISION)
ON APPEAL FROM THE COMPETITION APPEAL TRIBUNAL
Sir Marcus Smith (President), Carole Begent and Dr William Bishop
Royal Courts of Justice
Stand, London, WC2A 2LL

Date: 17/05/2024

Before:

SIR GEOFFREY VOS, MASTER OF THE ROLLS
SIR JULIAN FLAUX, CHANCELLOR OF THE HIGH COURT
and
LADY JUSTICE ANDREWS
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -

BETWEEN:
SPORTSDIRECT.COM RETAIL LIMITED
Claimant/Appellant
- v -

(1) NEWCASTLE UNITED FOOTBALL CLUB LIMITED
(2) NEWCASTLE UNITED LIMITED
Defendants/Respondents
Tony Singla KC, David Bailey and Stefan Kuppen (instructed by Travers Smith LLP) for the
Claimant/Appellant (“Sports Direct”)
Tom de la Mare KC and Alison Berridge (instructed by Northridge Law LLP) for the
Defendants/Respondents (together “Newcastle United”)

Hearing date: 9 May 2024
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
JUDGMENT

This judgment was handed down remotely at 10.00am on Friday 17 May 2024 by circulation
to the parties or their representatives by e-mail and by release to the National Archives.

SIR GEOFFREY VOS, MASTER OF THE ROLLS:
Introduction
1.
This is an expedited application for permission to appeal from a decision by the
Competition Appeal Tribunal (the Tribunal). The Tribunal dismissed Sports Direct’s
application for a mandatory interim injunction requiring Newcastle United to continue
to supply Sports Direct with its replica football kit for retail sale in its chain of shops
and online. Sports Direct alleges that Newcastle United have abused their dominant
position in the market for Newcastle United’s replica kit (the Market) and entered into
an exclusive sales arrangement with JD Sports Fashion plc (JD Sports), which has the
effect of unlawfully excluding Sports Direct from the Market. Sports Direct has been a
retail outlet for the replica kit for decades. JD Sports has also sold replica kit for a few
years.
2.
The Tribunal decided that Sports Direct had not shown that they had put forward a
serious case to be tried. Accordingly, it said that the application failed at its first hurdle.
The Tribunal nonetheless decided, because they had been fully argued, what it saw as
the three “remaining conditions” for the grant of interim relief. It decided, in outline,
that damages would not have been an adequate remedy either for Sports Direct (if an
injunction were to be wrongly refused) or for Newcastle United (if an injunction were
to be wrongly granted against it), and that the balance of convenience lay in favour of
refusing to grant interim relief.
3.
It is important to understand at the outset the statutory prohibitions on which Sports
Direct relies. Although Sports Direct and the Tribunal concentrated on the allegation of
abuse of dominant position, Sports Direct still also maintains its position that Newcastle
United have entered into anti-competitive arrangements.
4.
Section 2 of the Competition Act 1998 (the 1998 Act) imposes a prohibition on
agreements, decisions and concerted practices which prevent, restrict or distort
competition (the Chapter I Prohibition), as follows:
… agreements between undertakings, decisions by associations of undertakings or
concerted practices which—
(a) may affect trade within the United Kingdom, and
(b) have as their object or effect the prevention, restriction or distortion of
competition within the United Kingdom,
are prohibited unless they are exempt in accordance with the provisions of this Part.
(2) Subsection (1) applies, in particular, to agreements, decisions or practices
which—
(a) directly or indirectly fix purchase or selling prices or any other trading
conditions;
(b) limit or control production, markets, technical development or investment; … .
5.
Section 18 of the 1998 Act imposes a prohibition on conduct which amounts to the
abuse of a dominant position in a market (the Chapter II prohibition), as follows:

(1) … any conduct on the part of one or more undertakings which amounts to the
abuse of a dominant position in a market is prohibited if it may affect trade within
the United Kingdom.
(2) Conduct may, in particular, constitute such an abuse if it consists in—
(a) directly or indirectly imposing unfair purchase or selling prices or other unfair
trading conditions;
(b) limiting production, markets or technical development to the prejudice of
consumers; … .
6.
The parties could not agree on the applicable test for abuse of a dominant position.
Sports Direct argued that the domestic authorities demonstrated that it was sufficient,
as a matter of law, to show that that there was a material effect on or a distortion of
competition (see Sir Christopher Bellamy in Burgess v. Office of Fair Trading [2005]
CAT 25 at [336] (Burgess), Mann J in Purple Parking v. Heathrow Airport [2011]
EWHC 987 (Ch) at [105] (Purple Parking), and Rose J in Arriva v. London Luton
Airport [2014] EWHC 64 (Ch) at [106] and [166] (Arriva)). Conversely, Newcastle
United argued that Sports Direct was required to show that there had been elimination
of effective competition (see Microsoft Corp v. Commission of the European
Communities (Case T-201/04) [2007] ECR II–3601). Both sides accepted that it was
only if their respective hurdles were surmounted that Newcastle United had to show
that there was objective justification for what had been done.
7.
Sports Direct put its case simply before us. It submitted that, as it had pleaded,
Newcastle United had refused to continue supplies of replica kit to an existing
customer. Its expert’s note to the court had evidenced that such a refusal obviously had
a material effect on competition and caused harm to consumers, and Newcastle United
had failed to show any objective justification for it. Consumer harm was axiomatic
where Sports Direct was the leading sportswear discounter in the country, and
Newcastle United were obviously trying to increase prices to the consumer by
excluding Sports Direct from the Market.
8.
Sports Direct submitted that the Tribunal ought to have decided that it had shown there
was a serious case to be tried, and that the balance of convenience favoured maintaining
the status quo, which was the continued supply of replica kit to Sports Direct pending
the speedy trial that the Tribunal had said was made more urgent by its refusal to grant
interim relief [36]. The matter was urgent because the new season’s replica kit was due
to be launched on 7 June 2024, and Newcastle United should be required to supply what
Sports Direct had ordered well in advance of that date. Sports Direct placed great
emphasis on the supposed inconsistency between the Tribunal’s holding that it had no
serious case to be tried and its intended order for a speedy trial.
9.
Newcastle United supported the Tribunal’s reasoning, but said that even if there were
a serious case to be tried, the balance of convenience favoured the refusal of an
injunction. Moreover, damages were an adequate remedy for Sports Direct, which had
delayed excessively in making an application for an injunction – long after the window
for ordering replica kit for the 2024-2025 season in October 2023. Newcastle United
made a wholesale rebuttal of Sports Direct’s case theory. It contended that (as the
Tribunal had accepted at [34(1]) the relevant comparison was not with what happened
before Newcastle United was taken over in October 2021, but with the position after

the sale of Newcastle United and after the new owners had exercised their right to
develop its merchandising business.
10.
Newcastle United complained that Sports Direct had never provided any evidence of
its discounting strategy or of the previous distribution arrangements when Michael
Ashley (the owner of Sports Direct) had owned Newcastle United. The reality was that,
before the change of ownership, Sports Direct had been allowed by Newcastle United
and its manufacturers, J Carter Sporting Club Limited (trading as Castore), to sell
replica kit exclusively in the first 30 days after each season’s launch. That was the
crucial period when most sales were made. There was no evidence that the replica kit
had been discounted by Sports Direct in that period. In truth, Newcastle United had
increased competition by replacing the old arrangements with new arrangements
whereby Adidas AG (Adidas) manufactured, and Adidas, JD Sports and Newcastle
United sold replica kit. There was no consumer harm and Sports Direct was merely
trying to disrupt Newcastle United’s new and entirely legitimate marketing strategy.
11.
I have decided that Sports Direct’s appeal should be dismissed, even though I think that
the Tribunal ought to have held that it had established a serious case to be tried. The
Tribunal was right to think that, though damages would not be an adequate remedy for
either side, the balance of convenience favoured refusing interim relief and ordering a
speedy trial.
12.
Against this background, I will deal with the appeal under the following headings: (i)
further factual background and the Tribunal’s reasoning, (ii) the principles applicable
to the grant of interim injunctive relief, (iii) whether Sports Direct has established a
serious case to be tried, (iv) the adequacy of damages, (v) the balance of convenience,
and (vi) my conclusions.
Further factual background and the Tribunal’s reasoning
13.
It is hard to disentangle the Tribunal’s reasoning from its treatment of the facts. In these
circumstances, it is easier to deal with both together. The following paragraphs in this
section seek to summarise, as briefly as possible, how the Tribunal dealt with the
application and the relevant facts.
14.
The Tribunal approached the application for mandatory relief through the prism of
American Cyanamid Co v. Ethicon Limited [1975] 1 AC 396 (American Cyanamid). It
described the American Cyanamid structure at [7] as being made up of four conditions:
i)
The Tribunal must be satisfied that there is a serious issue to be tried or that
Sports Direct has no real prospect of succeeding in their claim for a permanent
injunction. In that context, it explained that fanciful claims were to be denied, a
mini-trial should be avoided, and assumptions should generally be made in
Sports Direct’s favour.
ii)
The Tribunal must next be satisfied that damages would not be an adequate
remedy for Sports Direct, on the premise that broad brush estimates of damage
were acceptable (see Garden Cottage Foods Ltd v. Milk Marketing Board
[1984] 1 AC 130 at 143).

iii)
The Tribunal must then consider whether the undertaking in damages would
adequately protect Newcastle United in the event of the interim injunction
having been wrongly granted. If it would, the injunction should be granted. If it
would not, the Tribunal proceeds to the balance of convenience.
iv)
The Tribunal said that the balance of convenience allowed the Tribunal to weigh
up the rival factors in favour of granting or refusing interim relief.
15.
On market definition and dominance, the Tribunal said at [9]-[10] that the case
concerned Newcastle United’s refusal to continue to supply Sports Direct with replica
kit, a term it defined broadly to include all branded wear, thus making dominance
“significantly harder to establish” [12]. It said that there were serious issues to be tried
as to whether Newcastle United was dominant in the Market and as to market definition.
16.
The Tribunal said at [13] that, because Newcastle United owned the intellectual
property and branding rights, they were the right defendants even though they did not
manufacture the replica kit themselves. It was those rights that enabled their replica kit
to be differentiated from other football clubs’ products and gave them market power.
At [14]-[17], the Tribunal explained how Mr Ashley’s sale of Newcastle United had
led to a change in marketing strategy. It declined to go into the circumstances or the
evidence for fear of conducting a mini-trial of highly controversial material. It recorded,
but did not take into account, that Newcastle United had contended that the change was
caused to some extent by “the extent and depth of the negative feeling amongst the
Club’s fanbase towards the previous ownership” and led to a desire to ensure that Sports
Direct was not involved in future sales of replica kit.
17.
The Tribunal said it was proceeding on the basis that even a dominant undertaking was
entitled, without necessarily making its actions abusive, to structure its business in order
to maximise its profits or further other interests. The following sentences show how the
Tribunal actually approached the question of whether there was a serious case to be
tried as to whether Newcastle United’s actions were abusive:
Put another way, before a restructuring of operations can be said to be abusive, the
facts (to the extent that they can be uncontroversially be ascertained) need to be
established and the nature of the abuse alleged identified.
For the present, we are concerned with the uncontentious facts, i.e. those that can
be relied upon for the purposes of assessing a serious issue to be tried.
I should say, at once, that that is not the correct legal approach. On an application for
an interim injunction, the court must take the claimant’s pleaded and evidenced case at
face value, unless it is shown to be plainly false or fanciful. In evaluating whether there
is a serious case to be tried, the Tribunal cannot disregard contested facts. When it
comes to the balance of convenience, of course, the strength of the case and the
evidential value of what is supporting it may be weighed (see Laddie J at pages 12-13
in Series 5 Software Ltd v. Clarke [1996] FSR 273 (Series 5 Software)).
18.
At [18]-[26], the Tribunal explained the arrangements with Castore, which are to
terminate on or about 26 May 2024, and the new arrangements that have been entered
into with Adidas and JD Sports. In the course of doing so, it said it was disregarding a
number of contentious matters. But then at [25]-[26], the Tribunal made a number of

criticisms of Sports Direct’s failure to give details of its sales and exclusivity
arrangements with Castore. Sports Direct had failed to produce any written agreement
and had not disclosed the terms. The Tribunal referred to documents that suggested that
Sports Direct had indeed sold the replica kit for an exclusive period in past years, but
said that Newcastle United had no place for Sports Direct in its new arrangements. The
Tribunal found it surprising that Sports Direct had not been more forthcoming about
the nature of its arrangements with Castore, given the centrality of expectation to Sports
Direct’s case, but then said:
At the end of the day, this is another area where we consider we must tread
carefully, because these are facts and matters for trial, not for this application.
And concluded that:
We do not know the extent to which Sports Direct was preferred, in terms of supply,
by Castore over other retailers. Although there was clearly some evidence
suggesting this, we prefer to treat this matter as a contentious matter for trial, and
to leave it out of account for present purposes.
19.
The Tribunal dealt with the question of whether there was a serious case to be tried,
which it said was whether a claim for abuse arguably arises on the facts as it had
articulated them, at [27]-[29].
20.
The Tribunal emphasised the dominant undertaking’s freedom to determine the manner
of market supply. It said (correctly, I might interpose) that it was possible to trigger the
Chapter II prohibition by failure to supply (as was alleged here) in addition to abusive
pricing and margin squeeze (which were not). It then took as its starting point the
absence of any prior arrangements, and said that a refusal by a dominant undertaking
to supply another undertaking could not give rise to an arguable case of abuse without
some further allegation. That said, prior arrangements and unilateral change by the
dominant undertaking were material matters deserving of a “long hard look” taking
into account the following non-exhaustive factors: (i) the reason for change, (ii) whether
the change was truly unilateral, (iii) the notice given, (iv) the reasonableness of the
expectation of continuing supply, (v) the length of the supply chain, and (vi) the harm
likely to occur.
21.
The Tribunal then said at [28(2) and (5)] that Sports Direct’s case was unarguable,
without something more being alleged. That case was, it said, that “where a dominant
undertaking … has historically supplied a non-substitutable product … in a certain way
… then it is an abuse of dominance for the dominant undertaking to change the manner
in which it supplies the market in the future” by ceasing to supply those previously
supplied. It was not up to Newcastle United at this stage to show that their conduct
could be objectively justified.
22.
The Tribunal’s key reasoning in rejecting Sports Direct’s submission that it had a
serious case to be tried is at [28(6)] and [29(1)]. It said that it was a low hurdle. There
were four reasons: (i) Sports Direct’s expectation of continuity of supply was low,
where there was no clear understanding of the arrangements, nor of the basis on which
Castore could have refused to supply Sports Direct, (ii) the new owners of Newcastle
United were entitled to change their supply arrangements, including replacing Castore
with Adidas, (iii) the suggested obligation to continue to supply Sports Direct was more

a fetter on competition than an enhancement of it, and (iv) the likelihood that Sports
Direct would undercut other retailers was irrelevant, absent an allegation of unfair
pricing. Finally, absent an arguable claim that Newcastle United had abused its
dominant position, there was no arguable claim that the arrangements with Adidas and
JD Sports were improperly collusive.
23.
The Tribunal then decided at [30(3)] that damages would not be an adequate remedy
for Sports Direct on one ground only. It decided that damages would be adequate as
regards the profits on sales of replica kit and sales of other goods alongside it. It was
not, however, an adequate remedy for the alleged loss of repeat business that Sports
Direct would suffer from disappointed Newcastle United fans who might no longer
think of Sports Direct as the “home of football”.
24.
In addition, the Tribunal decided at [32(3)] that damages would not be an adequate
remedy for Newcastle United if the injunction were wrongly granted essentially
because the injunction would “throw a substantial spanner in [the] delicate and complex
works” of forging new supply arrangements.
25.
Finally, the Tribunal decided at [34] that the balance of convenience lay in favour of
refusing an injunction for three reasons in descending order of importance: (i) the
existing position was not the regime established whilst Mr Ashley owned Newcastle
United (i.e Castore), but the position after the sale and the new owners’ right to develop
their business “according to their rights”, (ii) greater harm in terms of long-term
business would accrue to Newcastle United rather than Sports Direct, and (iii) the
injunction would require considerable policing. There were three factors that the
Tribunal regarded as either neutral or of no relevance. The neutral factor was consumer
benefit in the form of lower prices. Both Sports Direct’s delay and its lack of clean
hands drew the Tribunal into deciding facts that it was not prepared to find at this stage,
and were, therefore, of no relevance.
26.
The Tribunal concluded by saying, as I have already mentioned, that refusing interim
relief made a speedy trial more, and not less, urgent.
The principles applicable to the grant of interim injunctive relief
27.
It is perhaps useful to cite first the classic statement of the law in this area. Lord Diplock
said this at pages 407-8 in American Cyanamid:
… The use of such expressions as “a probability,” “a prima facie case,” or “a strong
prima facie case” in the context of the exercise of a discretionary power to grant an
interlocutory injunction leads to confusion as to the object sought to be achieved
by this form of temporary relief. The court no doubt must be satisfied that the claim
is not frivolous or vexatious, in other words, that there is a serious question to be
tried.
It is no part of the court’s function at this stage of the litigation to try to resolve
conflicts of evidence on affidavit as to facts on which the claims of either party
may ultimately depend nor to decide difficult questions of law which call for
detailed argument and mature considerations. These are matters to be dealt with at
the trial. … So unless the material available to the court at the hearing of the
application for an interlocutory injunction fails to disclose that the plaintiff has any

real prospect of succeeding in his claim for a permanent injunction at the trial, the
court should go on to consider whether the balance of convenience lies in favour
of granting or refusing the interlocutory relief that is sought.
As to that, the governing principle is that the court should first consider whether,
if the plaintiff were to succeed at the trial in establishing his right to a permanent
injunction, he would be adequately compensated by an award of damages for the
loss he would have sustained as a result of the defendant’s continuing to do what
was sought to be enjoined between the time of the application and the time of the
trial. If damages in the measure recoverable at common law would be adequate
remedy and the defendant would be in a financial position to pay them, no
interlocutory injunction should normally be granted, however strong the plaintiff’s
claim appeared to be at that stage. If, on the other hand, damages would not provide
an adequate remedy for the plaintiff in the event of his succeeding at the trial, the
court should then consider whether, on the contrary hypothesis that the defendant
were to succeed at the trial in establishing his right to do that which was sought to
be enjoined, he would be adequately compensated under the plaintiff’s undertaking
as to damages for the loss he would have sustained by being prevented from doing
so between the time of the application and the time of the trial. If damages in the
measure recoverable under such an undertaking would be an adequate remedy and
the plaintiff would be in a financial position to pay them, there would be no reason
upon this ground to refuse an interlocutory injunction.
It is where there is doubt as to the adequacy of the respective remedies in damages
available to either party or to both, that the question of balance of convenience
arises. It would be unwise to attempt even to list all the various matters which may
need to be taken into consideration in deciding where the balance lies, let alone to
suggest the relative weight to be attached to them. These will vary from case to
case.
28.
Few glosses are necessary on that passage, but it is perhaps helpful in the circumstances
of this case to cite also Lord Hoffmann in Sutradhar v. Natural Environment Research
Counsel [2006] UKHL 33, [2006] 4 All E.R. 490, where he said at [6]:
I therefore approach this appeal on the basis that the claimant’s allegations of
primary fact must (unless plainly fanciful, which is not the case here) be accepted
as true and allowance must be made for the possibility that further facts may
emerge on discovery or at trial. The question is whether, on these assumptions, he
has a real prospect of success.
29.
As it seems to me, the Tribunal in this case fell into error in completely disregarding
contested facts. That is not, as I have said, the correct approach. The claimant’s
allegations of primary fact must be accepted as true, unless plainly fanciful. As Lord
Diplock explained, the court must not try to resolve conflicts of evidence or law. That
is for trial. But that does not mean that disputed questions are disregarded. The question
is whether the material available to the court shows that the claimant has a real prospect
of succeeding in its claim for a permanent injunction. If so, the court proceeds to
consider the balance of convenience.
30.
Whilst I accept that the 4-stage process described by the Tribunal (see [14] above)
reflects Lord Diplock’s description, the process is perhaps a little more nuanced. The

question of the adequacy of damages for both sides can perhaps be regarded as part of,
rather than entirely distinct from, the exercise of determining where the balance of
convenience lies. The difference may well be immaterial in this case.
Has Sports Direct established a serious case to be tried?
31.
Once one feeds back into the equation of “serious case to be tried” the facts that the
Tribunal disregarded on the grounds that they were contested, it seems to me that one
can see that Sports Direct had indeed established a serious case to be tried. As the
Tribunal accepted, if that were the situation in relation to Sports Direct’s preferred case
of abuse of market dominance, it would also be so for its secondary case that Newcastle
United’s new supply agreements distorted competition in the Market. As Mr Tom de la
Mare KC, leading counsel for Newcastle United, effectively accepted in oral argument,
this appeal was all about the balance of convenience, because, even if Sports Direct had
failed to articulate a serious case to be tried at the initial hearing, it would probably be
able to do so by amendment after further disclosure. That pragmatic approach seems to
me to explain to some extent the apparent inconsistency between the Tribunal saying,
on the one hand, that Sports Direct had no serious case to be tried, and, on the other
hand, ordering a speedy trial of that unarguable case.
32.
In these circumstances, I can take this question shortly. Sports Direct argued that the
Tribunal had misunderstood its case on abuse of dominant position. The Tribunal’s
description of Sports Direct’s case at [28(4)] (see [21] above) left out the crucial
elements of the allegation, namely that Newcastle United had refused to supply Sports
Direct, and Sports Direct’s expert had said in a note to the court that the refusal to
supply Sports Direct and the new arrangements had a material effect on downstream
competition to the detriment of consumers. That, submitted Sports Direct, was because
the Tribunal wrongly thought, as it had said at [28(2)], and at [34(1)] in relation to the
balance of convenience, that Newcastle United’s conduct was to be judged on the basis
that there was no existing supply to Sports Direct because the existing position was
after the sale by Mr Ashley.
33.
In my judgment, the Tribunal ought to have looked at Sports Direct’s case, its pleading
and its evidence as if it would be established at trial, without foreclosing any of the
disputed facts against it. It was not suggested that its factual case was fanciful. There
were important questions about the definition of the Market and Newcastle United’s
dominance, and whether Sports Direct was right to say that the question of abuse of
dominant position should be considered from the standpoint of the existing supplies by
Castore. The Tribunal assumed that the Market and the dominance were as Sports
Direct alleged, but arguably looked at its case on the status quo on the basis that
Newcastle United would win that argument at trial. If Sports Direct were right that the
matter was to be viewed as a refusal to supply an existing customer, it was at least
arguable that Sports Direct’s expert was right to say that the withdrawal of its supply
might have a material effect on competition (see the test adumbrated in Burgess, Purple
Parking and Arriva at [6] above). It was obviously not for the court hearing an
application for interim relief to determine the conflict between those cases and
Microsoft, if indeed there really is one.
34.
I take the view that, had the Tribunal accepted Sports Direct’s pleaded case and expert
evidence at face value, it would have formed the view that it was possible for it to

succeed in showing breaches of both the Chapter II and the Chapter I prohibitions at
trial.
35.
The Tribunal was right to say that the serious case to be tried threshold was low, but
wrong to reach the conclusion that it had not been crossed. First, its view that Sports
Direct’s expectation of continuity of supply was low assumed wrongly that its case on
refusal of supply would be rejected. In any event, it was not for the Tribunal at this
stage to determine the level of expectation. That was indeed something for trial.
Secondly, whilst it is true that the new owners of Newcastle United were entitled to
change their supply arrangements, that did not foreclose Sports Direct’s arguments
about refusal of supply and competition harm. Thirdly, the Tribunal could not
determine at this stage whether the suggested obligation to continue to supply Sports
Direct was a fetter or an enhancement of competition. It could prove to be either at trial.
Finally, whilst I can well see how the likelihood of Sports Direct undercutting other
retailers is blunted by Newcastle United’s argument about Sports Direct’s historical
exclusivity during the crucial first 30 days of the new season’s sales of replica kit, it
could not properly be said at this stage that the point was irrelevant absent an allegation
of unfair pricing. Sports Direct’s status as a cost-cutting retailer with some 480 stores
and an online presence was a relevant part of the background to the case it was
advancing. The “clean hands” argument advanced before the Tribunal and by way of
Respondents’ Notice before us (to the effect that Sports Direct had a secret exclusivity
deal it wanted to protect) could not be determined one way or another when considering
whether there was a serious case to be tried.
36.
For these reasons, the Tribunal was wrong to decide that Sports Direct had no serious
case to be tried, something that it effectively acknowledged by granting a speedy trial.
The adequacy of damages
37.
On the adequacy of damages for Sports Direct, Newcastle United contend by their
Respondents’ Notice that the Tribunal ought to have decided that damages would have
been adequate. Newcastle United say that no evidence has been provided to substantiate
the loss of any sales of replica kit and associated purchases on the same shopping visit,
leading to material changes in future shopping patterns. It seems to me that it is obvious
that Newcastle United supporters coming in large numbers to buy their replica kit as
soon as it is launched from Sports Direct are likely to buy other things at the same time,
and to become repeat customers for unquantifiable later purchases. If they are
disappointed and disaffected by the inability to get replica kit where they have bought
it before, trade may well be lost. It will be hard to assess that loss. Accordingly, I agree
with the Tribunal’s view that, on this limited ground, damages would not be an adequate
remedy for Sports Direct.
38.
Sports Direct argued that the Tribunal was wrong to decide that damages would not be
an adequate remedy for Newcastle United if the injunction were wrongly granted. As it
seems to me, however, the Tribunal was entirely right to say (as it did at [32]) that, if
the injunction were wrongly granted, a substantial spanner would be thrown into
Newcastle United’s new supply arrangements. It would be very hard to disentangle
what loss was caused by the different consequences. Newcastle United would be
breaking its exclusivity arrangements with JD Sports and possibly its agreement with
Adidas. The ramifications might be very complex indeed. Damages would certainly not
be adequate for Newcastle United.

The balance of convenience
39.
The Tribunal decided the balance of convenience against Sports Direct. The fact that I
have held that it was wrong about whether there is a serious case to be tried does not
affect its reasoning on this point. Unless it can be shown that it exercised its discretion
on the wrong legal basis or took into account matters it should not have done, or failed
to take into account matters it should have done, we should not interfere with its
decision, especially as it is a specialist tribunal, expert in competition matters.
40.
Sports Direct effectively attacked the reasoning of the Tribunal on balance of
convenience on the same basis as it attacked its reasoning on serious case to be tried. It
said that the Tribunal was simply wrong to look at the matter as if the existing position
was after Mr Ashley had sold Newcastle United. The existing position was that, even
now, Castore was supplying Sports Direct, and those supplies were being peremptorily
withdrawn. Sports Direct was not asking for exclusivity. It was, to put it colloquially,
‘no skin off Newcastle United’s nose’ to supply its order for the 2024/2025 season at
the same time as Adidas supplied JD Sports.
41.
It seems to me that the Tribunal was, at this stage of its enquiry, entitled to take into
account its view of the strength of Sports Direct’s overall case (see Series 5 Software
at [17] above). Even if there were (as I have found) a serious case to be tried, the
Tribunal was entitled to judge that it was a weak case for the reasons it effectively gave.
By saying that the status quo was after the sale of Newcastle United, that the new
owners had a right to develop their business, and that greater long-term harm would be
caused to Newcastle United rather than Sports Direct, it was performing exactly the
exercise that the balance of convenience requires. Moreover, I think it was right to
attribute less, if any, weight to the supposed consumer benefit in the form of lower
prices and Sports Direct’s delay and its alleged lack of clean hands. These were factors
that may look very different once further evidence is available. So far as consumer harm
is concerned, it is by no means clear that replacing Castore with Adidas, and replacing
Sports Direct with JD Sports (as the main retail outlet), will lead to consumer harm. It
may, but it may also not. It is very hard to say at this stage.
42.
In essence, I agree with the Tribunal’s perspective that the balance lies in favour of
allowing the new owners to make their own new arrangements without the interference
of interim relief. The right course was to order a speedy trial to minimise the damage
to Sports Direct. The trial will no doubt be hard fought, but the damage to Newcastle
United will be far more fundamental if the injunction is wrongly granted than the
damage that will be done to Sports Direct if it misses one, or even two, season’s supply.
We heard some argument about the kind of order that Sports Direct was seeking, and a
new draft was presented to us in the middle of the hearing. The order would be complex
and difficult to police as the Tribunal said. It is not simply a question of selling one line
item at one time. It would require complex mechanisms to make it work. Whilst it could
be done, it is another reason why the balance of convenience lies against the grant of
interim relief.
Conclusions
43.
For the reasons I have given, whilst I have decided that Sports Direct had established
that they had a serious case to be tried, I would not allow its appeal.

44.
The question then arises whether we should grant Sports Direct permission to appeal,
since this has been an expedited rolled up hearing. I think it is only right to grant
permission to appeal on the ground that Sports Direct were able to show that there was
both a real prospect of success and some other reasons for the appeal to be heard. Those
reasons are: (i) the apparent inconsistency in the Tribunal’s disposition of Sports
Direct’s application, finding no serious case to be tried, yet ordering a speedy trial, and
(ii) the Tribunal’s inappropriate approach to the facts in refusing to take any account of
facts that it thought to be contested (see [17] and [29] above).
45.
Accordingly, I would grant Sports Direct permission to appeal and dismiss its appeal.
SIR JULIAN FLAUX, CHANCELLOR OF THE HIGH COURT:
46.
I agree.
LADY JUSTICE ANDREWS:
47.
I also agree.
